 
Mediterranean Archaeology and Archaeometry, Vol. 18, No 4, (2018), pp. 139-147 
Copyright © 2018 MAA 
Open Access. Printed in Greece. All rights reserved. 
 
DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.1478020 
CONSOLIDATION OF THE RAPANUI ASTRONOMY 
CONCEPT INVENTORY AND RE-APPRAISAL 
OF APPLIED ASTRONOMIC OBSERVATION 
AT PAPA UI HETU’U, RAPA NUI 
Alexandra Edwards*1,2, Barthelemy d’Ans2,3 and Edmundo Edwards1,2  
1 Pacific Islands Research Institute 
2 Rapa Nui Planetarium 
3Universidad Peruana de Arte Orval 
 
Received: 28/02/2018 
Accepted: 04/06/2018 
*Corresponding author: Alexandra Edwards (alexandraedwards@yahoo.com.au) 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Rapa Nui, the easternmost settlement and most isolated trade outpost in ancient Polynesia, represents one of 
the most ambitious feats in Polynesian wayfinding, and by default reflects the high level of competence in 
navigation and interpretation of astronomical and natural phenomena, currently a popular field of inquiry 
in Polynesian ethnoastronomy. However, as skywatching was not limited to navigation, the full scope of 
Rapanui applied astronomical observation and complexity of astronomical devices was much broader. 
Observatories, calendric calibration systems, “star-maps,” and structures with astronomical alignments, 
have all been identified for Rapa Nui, yet the two main challenges confronting researchers is the scarcity of 
extant information, as well as degradation and site location due to errors in the official mapping of the 
island. The present investigation re-examines and extends the Astronomy concept inventory of the ancient 
Rapanui, with regards to the toponymy of local stars and asterisms, and an inquiry into the stars and 
methods used by traditional navigators to locate Rapa Nui in past times. The results have been analyzed 
within both a local and regional context. In addition, our team did a re-appraisal of the astronomical 
functions of the Matariki (Pleiades) stone and related petroglyphs in the area of Papa Ui Hetu’u (star-gazing 
rock) on Poike Peninsula, which E. Edwards and Antonio Belmonte had investigated in 2004. For the first 
time, this collected data was evaluated within the context of a digital planetarium, permitting the review and 
identification of alignments between astronomical phenomena and sites of observation as if viewed in situ 
and in the pertinent chronology; together with photogrammetry/3D-modelling of astronomical devices at 
Papa Ui Hetu’u, these techniques offer a new and more precise line of research, rendering intriguing results. 
 
 
 
KEYWORDS: archaeoastronomy, ethnoastronomy, toponymy, Easter Island, Rapa Nui, Polynesia, planetar-
ium, 3D modelling 
 
140 
Α.EDWARDS et al 
 
Mediterranean Archaeology and Archaeometry, Vol. 18, No 4, (2018), pp. 139-147 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The purpose of this paper is to consolidate the 
Rapanui Astronomy Concept Inventory mainly ob-
tained from the works of Routledge (1911-1923; 
1919) Englert (1974), and Métraux (n.d.; 1960), as 
well as the previous ethnographic research of E. 
Edwards (2010, 2013). Previous studies have built 
upon the works of Routledge and Métraux, which 
are invaluable but brief, and contain several incon-
sistencies due to the inaccurate interpretation of 
data. Routledge and Métraux collected ethnographic 
information from direct sources, however, subse-
quent scholars without access to the original material 
built upon the errors of their previous colleagues, 
incrementing and confirming fallacies, which upon 
closer inspection yielded an assembly of unreliable 
results. Based upon the field notes of both Routledge 
and Métraux, identifying errors, offering a few 
amendments, and hypothesizing on the correct in-
terpretation of specific elements we were able to 
form a compendium of the terms used to designate 
different types of heavenly bodies (planets, aster-
isms, and individual stars), ultimately offering an 
updated and exhaustive list of Rapanui star names, 
as well as their meaning and cultural significance. 
Regarding Papa Ui Hetu’u, our team re-appraised 
the cultural features and landscape context of this 
observatory, adding alignments to the Pleiades (or 
June solstice) and the path of the stars that Polyne-
sian navigators would have used to locate Rapa Nui. 
2. PREVIOUS STUDIES AND 
METHODOLOGY  
Of the many scholars that have worked on Rapa 
Nui only a few have covered the subject of ethnoas-
tronomy. Ferdon (1961), Mulloy (1975), and Liller 
(1986, 1989, 1993, 2000, 2004) worked on the island 
between 1955-2004, however most of their work 
focused on archaeoastronomy, recording alignments 
between the famous Rapanui ruins and celestial 
phenomena, and less on the cultural aspect regard-
ing the purpose behind these orientations beyond 
basic time-keeping. Excluding E. Edwards and his 
team, the few scholars that collected information 
about the names of stars and their significance in a 
cultural context are Routledge (1911-1923; 1919), 
followed by Englert (1974), and Métraux (n.d.; 1960). 
However, all of their collected data does not amount 
to much if presented individually. Routlege worked 
on Rapa Nui between 1914 and 1915. Her principal 
informants were Kapiera Maherenga and Parlemón 
Te Haha. Maherenga, once a competitor (hopu manu) 
in the Bird-man cult competitions was born ca. 1846 
and was a member of the Ure o Hei clan via paternal 
descent and the Hamea Clan from his maternal side. 
Maherenga provided most of the star names record-
ed by Routledge. Te Haha was born near Maunga 
Kou’a in approximately 1832. He was an ariki paka 
nobleman of the prestigious Miru clan and was a 
member of the noble entourage of paramount chief 
Ngaara. His nephew Charlie Teao was one of Mét-
raux’s principal informants. Another of Routledge’s 
informant was José Fati (Hati) Rongo Pua Tea, Fati 
was the father of Isaías Fati, one of the main inform-
ants of Englert, Métraux, and E. Edwards. 
Englert’s main informants were the previously 
mentioned I. Fati, as well as Rafael Haoa, Mateo 
Hereveri, and Santiago Pakarati. Haoa was the in-
formant for a host of present-day ethnographers 
working on Rapa Nui. Hereveri, a nobleman of the 
Miru clan was considered an authority regarding 
Rapanui lore. Hereveri was also an informant to E. 
Edwards. Pakarati was the son of Rapanui catechist 
Nicolás Pakarati Ure a Potahi (also an informant of 
Routledge and Métraux). Métraux’s informants were 
Victoria Rapahango Tepuko and Charlie Teao. 
Rapahango was also a Miru Clan member and she 
had learned much from Mateo Hereveri and her 
uncle Parlemon Te Haha who had lived with her in 
her youth; both men had been informants of 
Routledge. Teao, was a nephew of Te Haha and a 
grandson of Tomenika Vaka Tuku Onge, also 
Routledge´s informant. 
For this paper we reviewed the original and pub-
lished works of Routledge, Métraux, Englert, and E. 
Edwards, as well as the dictionaries of Tregear (1891) 
and Churchill (1912)  
3. CULTURAL CONTEXT 
The same as other Polynesians, the Rapanui visu-
alized the celestial sphere as several superimposed 
heavens, which together with the stars and constella-
tions were believed to be the abode of the gods. The 
careful observation of the sky was useful for naviga-
tion but also to determine the time of the year, estab-
lishing a ritual calendar and regulating farming and 
fishing activities. Astronomer priests or skywatchers 
studied the Moon and stars, and less often the Sun, 
from special observatories built in places with the 
best vantage point for each astronomic event, an-
nouncing when festivities, ceremonies, prohibitions, 
and the different seasons started and ended. A total 
of 58 alignments have been registered on Rapa Nui, 
with observatories (tupa) oriented to significant ce-
lestial markers, most to the Pleiades and Orion’s 
Belt, but also Vega, Alpha Beta Centauri, in a 
North—South axis, etc….(Edwards and Belmonte 
2004; Edwards and Edwards 2010). These construc-
tions reflect a shared bank of knowledge that dates 
back to the Austronesian roots of the Rapanui peo-
ple, and which evolved for very practical reasons: 
RE-APPRAISAL OF APPLIED ASTRONOMIC OBSERVATION AT PAPA UI HETU’U, RAPA NUI 
141 
 
Mediterranean Archaeology and Archaeometry, Vol. 18, No 4, (2018), pp. 139-147 
subsistence, immigration and trade. Clark has calcu-
lated that “the probability of these alignments being 
accidental is 10,000,000 to 1.” (Edwards and Clark 
1984).  
Makemson (1941) recorded 772 star names else-
where in Polynesia, and skywatching was taught in 
special schools. In Rapa Nui unfortunately much of 
this information did not survive the great cultural 
and social upheaval as a result of outside contact, 
colonization, and missionary proselytization. 
Like other Polynesians, the Rapanui had an annu-
al cycle of activities that determined what sort of 
chores and rituals people carried out during each 
month of the year, evidently linked to the weather 
and the seasons. Astronomical phenomena helped 
astronomer priests (skywatchers) determine the dif-
ferent times of the year, divided between periods of 
rain and drought, a season of plenty and of want. 
Since the chiefs were the medium by which deified 
ancestors provided for their descendants by making 
the plants grow and animals multiply, the entire clan 
ensured the success of their subsistence activities by 
making offerings and sacrifices to honor the gods in 
an agricultural cycle that in other Polynesian islands 
was called Te Fekai Nga Atua (the gods produce 
food; Edwards and Edwards 2013). The Rapanui diet 
depended mainly on agricultural products, chicken, 
and fish, in that order. The Rapanui carried out sev-
eral rituals related to the planting and harvest of 
their most important crops. The harvest was im-
portant not only as related to food production and 
surplus, but through feasting and ceremonies it was 
also of great social and symbolic significance. Food-
sharing expressed kinship ties and solidarity, and 
validated a set of principles, social codes, rights and 
duties. The opening of the deep-sea fishing season in 
October/November was also widely celebrated. It 
was imperative that the seasonal activities and feasts 
should be performed at the right and auspicious 
times, and that was the jurisdiction of skywatchers. 
Aside from the lunar months, specific annual activi-
ties and events were marked by the first appearance 
of specific stars at dusk and dawn. Since there was a 
fair amount of prediction involved in their work, 
these specialized priests also delved into the world 
of prophecy and magic. 
4. RESULTS 
Polynesians had names for over 700 stars, and it 
was believed that many of them were placed in the 
sky by the gods to simply humor humans while 
others were thought to be the eyes of deified ances-
tors (Makemson). This explains why several Polyne-
sian star names include the term mata, meaning 
“eye” (Ibid). The generic Rapanui name for stars, 
asterisms, and constellations is hetu’u, a term with a 
root common to all Polynesian languages, however, 
Eastern Polynesians grouped stars to form figures 
that differed from those of Western Polynesia with 
only the names of the most important calendar stars 
remaining constant, specifically the Pleiades (Ma-
tariki) and Orion (Tautoru; Makemson, Tregear, 
Churchill). 
We were able to record 25 star names (three of 
which remain undetermined in relation to classic 
astronomy terms (Mere, Ehuo/Ehua, and Pau), in 
addition to the names for the Milky Way (Te Ngo´e), 
and Venus (various terms) and Mars (Matamea). We 
amended the designation of several Rapanui star 
names in relation to the previous concept inventory. 
We also added Tau Ehu for Sirius, and Tauhoru and 
Hetu’u Tea in addition to the existing names for 
Venus. Four “new” star names were added: Atutahi, 
He Mata/Mataa Te Tautoru, Ehuo/Ehua, and Pipiri, 
while two were deleted as a duplicates (Vari 
Hariu/Horia and Hare a Tanga). Sirius and Vega 
had multiple Rapanui names, which seems accurate 
for the latter, but may be a source error for the for-
mer. Orion’s Belt on the other hand is both a constel-
lation of six stars (Etui = Orion´s Belt + Sheath), but 
is called Tautoru when referring only to the belt 
(Routledge n.d., Metraux n.d.). We also revised the 
translation of Rapanui stars names, some of which 
have more than one interpretation. A list of the com-
plete and revised Rapanui astronomy concept inven-
tory appears in Appendix 1. The table in Appendix 1 
starts with the terms for the Milky Way, followed by 
the planets Mars and Venus, continuing with the 
names of fourteen asterisms and constellations, and 
ending with eleven single star names. These are pre-
sented in alphabetical order within each of their 
categories. 
For the Rapanui, the Milky Way was a mythical 
marine creature, a non-fearsome sea monster of 
sorts. Regarding the planets, the Rapanui realized 
that Venus and Mars were different, that they do not 
twinkle, and move unlike stars, however the distinc-
tions stopped there, with bright stars and planets 
both being called hetu’u purapura (Churchill).  
As for the planets, only the Rapanui names for 
Venus and Mars survived to the present day, alt-
hough it is likely that like other Polynesians they 
would have also recognized the other visible planets, 
namely Mercury, Saturn, and Jupiter (Makemson, 
Tregear). 
Important time-keeping stars and asterisms were: 
Matariki (the Pleiades), Nga Vaka (Alpha and Beta 
Centauri), Mere (possibly Vega), Tau Ehu or Te Pou 
o Te Rangi (Sirius), and Atutahi (Canopus), as well 
as the constellation Orion, which the Rapanui divid-
ed into six separate parts: E Tui (Orion’s Belt and 
sheath - 6 stars), He Mata/Mataa te Tautoru (Bella-
142 
Α.EDWARDS et al 
 
Mediterranean Archaeology and Archaeometry, Vol. 18, No 4, (2018), pp. 139-147 
trix and probably Meissa and ȹ Ori 1 and 2), Tauto-
ru (Orion’s Belt), Po’o or Po Roroa (Saiph), Rei a 
Tanga (Betelgeuse), and Vari Koreha (Rigel). Mata-
mea (Mars) was also used as a calendar marker to-
gether with the Pleiades (Matariki), Orion’s Belt 
(Tautoru), and Sirius (Tau Ehu or Te Pou o Te 
Rangi). The events that each of the above marked 
can be seen in Appendix 1. Other stars that stand out 
are Nga Vaka (Alpha and Beta Centauri), which in 
the Southern Hemisphere may be used to find the 
South cardinal position in relation to Crux (Tatauro), 
and Antares (Te Hau Vaero), the traditional star 
used to mark the latitude position of Rapa Nui in 
traditional Polynesian navigation when at its zenith; 
islands were marked by the brightest stars that 
passed directly above them and Antares may be seen 
at 89°19’07.5” over Rapa Nui. 
 
Three out of 25 collected Rapanui star names in-
clude the word mata, which as mentioned previous-
ly, is characteristic of the Polynesians, who consid-
ered that some stars were the watchful eyes of im-
portant ancestors (Edwards and Edwards 2013). In 
addition, the planet Mars was called Matamea, but 
in this case it is probably best to interpret it in refer-
ence to color and the custom of visualizing stars as 
eyes, rather than it being the eye of a particular per-
son. 
5. OTHERS CONSIDERATIONS 
In addition to star names we also collected a list of 
terms that are related to astronomical concepts, 
(from Churchill, Métraux n.d., and Englert). Many of 
these had not been recorded together before (see 
Table 1). 
Table 1. Additional Rapanui Astronomy Terms 
Rapanui Name 
Translation 
Comments 
Source 
Api te Mahina e te Ra’a 
The Sun presses the Moon 
A lunar eclipse? 
3 
Hetu’u Kokiri 
Shooting star 
 
1 
Hetu’u Pupura 
1. Planet or very bright star 2. –mai. To ogle, stare 
Pupura is to shine bright 
1 3 
Hetu’u Rere 
Meteor 
 
1 
Hetu’u Ave 
Comet 
 
2 
Hetu’u Viri 
Shooting star, meteor 
 
2 
Hiti 
To rise (regarding the light of the moon, sun, stars) 
 
2 
Homo 
Meteorite, meteoroid crater 
 
2 
Kai te Mahina e te Ra’a 
The Sun eats the Moon 
A lunar eclipse? 
3 
Kai te Ra’a e te Mahina 
The Moon eats the Sun 
A solar eclipse? 
3 
Kihi Ra’a 
Ray of sunlight 
 
3 
Kihi Mahina 
Moonbeam 
 
3 
Me’e Nui Te Hetu’u 
Sky with many stars 
 
3 
Ruaroa 
Tropic of Capricorn 
 
1 
Uero 
Comet, twilight, a ray, radiant star 
 
1 
Verovero 
To twinkle like the stars 
 
1 
 
Of the new terms listed above, there are a few that 
stand out because of there telling implications. First 
of all, there are several terms for different kinds of 
eclipses, all of them indicating that the Rapanui the-
orized that it was the sun and moon that caused 
eclipses. In addition, the word “homo” or meteoroid 
crater indicates that this event must have occurred 
on the island in past times, and perhaps more than 
once.  
6. THE PAPA UI HETU’U OBSERVATORY.  
In 1914, K. Routledge's informants told her that 
astronomer priests climbed Poike peninsula, on the 
Eastern headland of the island, during the lunar 
month of Tuaharo (February/March) to watch the 
rising of the Pleiades from Papa Ui Hetu'u (Figure 
1), which in the Rapanui language means "rock to 
watch the stars from".  Santiago Pakarati showed 
this boulder to E. Edwards in 1960, consisting of a 
basalt block of greyish color (Munsell chart 2.5Y-7/1) 
that probably originated in one of the lava flows 
located in the surrounding area that was purposely 
moved to its present location. The upper surface of 
the boulder has 13 cupule-like depressions of differ-
ent sizes and depths that most probably are a conse-
quence of the natural cooling process of the lava and 
later erosion, but which locals have long considered 
to be akin to the Pleiades. In 2005, E. Edwards and A. 
Belmonte found that this spot was ideal for observ-
ing the heliacal rise of many important local calen-
dric stars, as it is completely open towards the East-
ern quadrant of the island. 
 
Figure 1. Papa Ui Hetu´u 
The boulder is located 178 m above sea level at 
109°14'31. 80" W, 27°5'44. 21 S. It lies east of Pua Ka 
Tiki, the peak of Poike volcano. As it has an irregular 
shape, its approximate dimensions are: 1 m high by 
1.5 m long and 0.80 m in width. It weighs approxi-
mately 300 kgs. The photogrammetric mould that we 
made of it appears in Figure 2. 
RE-APPRAISAL OF APPLIED ASTRONOMIC OBSERVATION AT PAPA UI HETU’U, RAPA NUI 
143 
 
Mediterranean Archaeology and Archaeometry, Vol. 18, No 4, (2018), pp. 139-147 
 
Figure 2. Comparative images of the boulder known as 
Papa Ui Het'u--photograph on the left, and  photogram-
metry mould on the right, which highlights the distribu-
tion and depth of the cupules said to represent 
the Pleiades. 
 We proceeded to register the landscape’s profile 
surrounding the Papa Ui Hetu’u site with a fisheye 
lens, and established several checkpoints upon the 
terrain, so we could later use it to correct the plane-
tarium digital view (Stellarium, Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. (A) development of the 360° panorama. (B) Im-
portant elements in its landscape. (C) Landscape profile 
with fisheye lens and mask used in the stellarium format. 
Installing the landscape profile in Stellarium and repro-
ducing the observed event. Field check of the landscape 
profile altitude, plus the time. azimuth, and sunset on July 
20, 2017. 
This image was later edited in Photoshop and we 
then proceeded to erase completely the sky leaving 
only the profile and a transparent background. We 
then used this masked image in the profile of the 
digital planetarium and inserted into it the coordi-
nates obtained from our GPS and reoriented the 
profile to show the most prominent elements of the 
landscape with the correct azimuth. Finally we veri-
fied the model to see if it adjusted to reality, by su-
perposing an astronomic event, which in this case 
was the sunset of July 20, 2017, and check that the 
hour, elevation, and it profile, together with the 
height and azimuth of the Sun, were correct with the 
model. Using a Google Earth map, we proceeded to 
verify the area of the horizon that can be observed 
from there, and also to make sure that this adjusted 
to reality. This method served to locate in a more 
exact manner all the cartographic elements con-
tained in our profile. 
We were interested in measuring the intervals be-
tween the angles and the azimuths observed on the 
nearly 180° wide landscape view from the stone, 
paying special attention to azimuths 302 and116, 
while also checking if there was any relationship to 
the heliacal rising or setting of any important Ra-
panui calendar stars or the Pleiades as as suggested 
in oral tradition (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4. (A) Ocean view azimuths and intervals upon an 
oceanic horizon (B) Detail of the visible area of land and 
its geographic markers (C) Perspective view of the area 
that can be observed from Papa Ui hetu´u. 
7. ANALYSIS OF THE CULTURAL EVENTS 
RELATED TO THIS SITE AND ITS PHYSI-
CAL LOCATION 
We carried out a basic survey of all the surround-
ing area to locate any contiguous archaeological 
remains, as well as specific places that could be asso-
ciated with Rapanui cultural landscape. 
On the East side there are three trachyte domes 
that are the most conspicuous elements in the land-
scape (Figure 5). On the northernmost dome, lie the 
remains of a disfigured statue (moai) with no plat-
form or ahu, which is clearly visible from Papa Ui 
Hetu'u and  may have bee placed there intentionally. 
The southernmost dome is associated with several 
important oral traditions: on its southern foothill 
there is cave that was the abode of a group sky-
watchers who lived permanently with their acolytes, 
while above and to the left of the cave there is a large 
rock carving called Vai a Heva (water of Heva) that 
consists of a face with a large protruding eyes and a 
gaping mouth that served as a basin to collect rain-
water. To the East, at a distance of approximately 
200 m in a E-SE direction, lies a small basalt outcrop 
with several petroglyphs of fishhooks of different 
sizes and shape. These petroglyphs were previously 
registered by E. Edwards and G. Lee, and now we 
added a photogrametric record of them (Figure 6). 
144 
Α.EDWARDS et al 
 
Mediterranean Archaeology and Archaeometry, Vol. 18, No 4, (2018), pp. 139-147 
Significantly, petroglyphs of fishhooks and deep sea 
creatures, such as tuna and shark, are also present in 
several Rapanui sites where skywatchers were 
known to observe the night sky. 
 
Figure 5. View from Papa Ui Hetu'u to the three trachyte 
domes in Poike; these were also exploited for trachyte and 
several small statues raised on platforms on the eastern 
headland of the island were sourced there. 
 
Figure 6. View towards Papa Ui Hetu'u as seen from the 
unnamed outcrop with fishhook petroglyphs. The cave 
where the skywatchers are said to have lived with their 
acolytes and the stone water basin known as Vai a Heva 
are also visible from this spot.   
Lastly, to the Northeast there is a ceremonial 
platform that lies in a perfect East-West position. The 
relationship between the sites and/or significance of 
this emplacement remains to be determined. 
8. ANALYSIS OF THE CULTURAL EVENTS 
RELATED TO THIS SITE AND ITS PHYSI-
CAL LOCATION 
By inputting our collected data into Stellarium we 
were able to determine the following: 
There are two zenithal celestial objects that pass 
directly over Rapa Nui and Papa Ui Hetu'u. One is 
Te Hau Vaero (Antares), and the other is Ko Tau 
Erua Ehu, which in our consolidation of star names 
we found to possibly represent Castor and Pollux or 
alternatively Wezen and Adhara, which are two 
bright stars in the Canis Major constellation. In past 
times, zenithal stars were known as pito (umbilicus) 
in many parts of Polynesia, and their path was con-
sidered to mark the umbilicus of the sky for the spe-
cific island that these stars passed directly over. Zen-
ithal stars were of prime importance in traditional 
Polynesian navigation, serving to exactly locate each 
of the islands these stars marked. Interestingly, An-
tares is visible during the winter months, while 
Wezen and Adhara may be observed in the Summer, 
thus if Ko Tau Erua Ehu indeed refers to Wezen and 
Adhara it is possible to consider that traditional nav-
igators would have been able to more easily locate 
Rapa Nui year-round. Now, determining what are 
the most propitious times of the year to travel to 
Rapa Nui from elsewhere in Polynesia is a subject of 
another study. 
Most significantly, from Papa Ui Hetu'u it is pos-
sible to observe the entire path of the Pleiades from 
heliacal rising to heliacal setting. Such observations 
were very important to the ancient Rapanui as the 
first full Moon after the heliacal rising of the Pleiades 
marked the first night of the year and opened a time 
of festivities and island-wide rejoicing. This was also 
true in most of Polynesia. Due to the latitude of Rapa 
Nui, the Pleiades follow nearly the same trajectory of 
the path of the Sun on the June solstice. To deter-
mine approximately when the Rapanui new year 
began depends very much on the visible altitude of 
the Pleiades at the time of observation, which would 
have been in the very early morn, before sunrise. On 
Rapa Nui, the Pleiades disappear for a few months, 
becoming visible once again before sunrise in the last 
two weeks of June, considering that it is best ob-
served the higher it is in the sky, 20-30 degrees de-
grees above the horizon. The Rapa Nui new year 
would have then begun on the first full Moon after 
this celestial event. Conversely, the observation of 
the Pleiades high in the sky shortly after sunset in 
November, marked the opening of the deep sea fish-
ing season on Rapa Nui.   
9. CONCLUSIONS 
Although much has been lost regarding the astro-
nomical knowledge of the ancient Rapanui, the ex-
tant names recorded here adeptly convey the 
breadth and richness of Rapanui mythology and 
calendrics. The stars that were remembered up to 
modern times were the most important ones, part of 
a complex annual cycle of activities, both ritual and 
practical. They also point to a knowledge base that 
hails back to the Lapita ancestors of the Rapanui, as 
RE-APPRAISAL OF APPLIED ASTRONOMIC OBSERVATION AT PAPA UI HETU’U, RAPA NUI 
145 
 
Mediterranean Archaeology and Archaeometry, Vol. 18, No 4, (2018), pp. 139-147 
is the case with Matariki and Tautoru (i.e. the Pleia-
des and Orion’s Belt), but also that places Rapa Nui 
within a contact network extending to the Tuamotu 
Islands and Tahiti (i.e. the moral tale regarding the 
repentant jealous husband and/or the selfish par-
ents). It seems significant that an important number 
of Rapanui stars refer back to the legendary home-
land of Hiva, and to its infamous persons and nota-
ble culture heroes. The same as elsewhere in Polyne-
sia, Rapanui ethnoastronomy went beyond naviga-
tion, serving a religious purpose associated to a be-
lief system that on Rapa Nui survived until the mid-
nineteenth century. Evidently, the present Rapanui 
star concept inventory is incomplete as there must 
have been many more star names than those pre-
sented here. Nevertheless, we have compiled an 
exhaustive list, benefitting from a comparative anal-
ysis of the various ethnographic sources. The num-
ber of clarifications and amendments to the previous 
concept inventory serves as a reminder of the pitfalls 
of relying on secondary source materials when car-
rying out this sort of work. Considering the total 
number of compiled star names, it seems significant 
that we were able to add two entries and provide a 
much more accurate index of star names, even if a 
few items remain undetermined. Lastly, it is im-
portant to note that the multiplicity of particular star 
names is simply a sign of a healthy evolution of con-
cepts, in accordance with cultural growth and in 
response to societal changes. In the case of dual 
meanings, oftentimes this is purposeful, in much the 
same way that the connotations of words in a verse, 
lend themselves to a poetic layering of meanings. 
Ethnoastronomy and the unique Rapanui idiosyn-
crasy deserve as much. 
As the Poike peninsula forms the eastern 
headland of the island, it’s location is a priviledged 
place to observe the heliacal rise of certain celestial 
objects from the ocean. The rock known as Papa Ui 
Hetu’u undoubtely was intentionaly placed in that 
position and although its cupules are of natural 
origin, the islanders identified them with the 
Pleiades (Matariki) and believed they held some 
magical power (mana). This was most probably due 
to the fact that from that precise location it was 
possible to observe the rising and setting of the 
Pleiades, the foremost calendar stars of the Rapanui 
and all Polynesians. Diverse cultural remains located 
in the vecinity of this site, testify to the presence of 
specialized observers or skywatchers as mentioned 
in their oral traditions. 
 
Appendix 1. The Rapanui astronomy concept inventory. 
Rapanui Name 
Translation 
Star / Asterism 
Comments 
Source 
Te Ngo’e 
Fabulous Marine Crea-
ture 
The Milky Way 
A fabulous marine creature 
5 
Matamea 
Red Eye 
Mars 
One “star” 
Observed from Poike 
Announced: start of Koro festival; 
 egg hunt in Dec. with Matariki,  
 Tau Ehu, & Tautoru  
Ominous with Pau and Tautoru  
 appearing in Oct./Nov. 
2, 4 
 
 
Taurua or Hetu’u 
Tea,  
 or Tauhoru and  
 Hetu’u Ahi-ahi 
Beautiful Two (Venus) 
and 
 Evening Star 
Venus 
Tuaurua refers to Venus (archaic) 
Presently Hetu’u Ahi-ahi  
3, 6, 7 
 
Taurua or Hetu’u 
Tea,  
 or Tauhoru and 
 Hetu’u Popo-
hanga 
Beautiful Two (Venus) 
and 
 Beautiful Bucking to & 
fro  
 or Morning Star  
Venus 
Tuaurua refers to Venus (archaic) 
Tauhoru is a historical name 
Presently Hetu’u Popohanga  
3, 6, 7 
 
Ehuo or Ehua 
- 
—Undetermined— 
A large constellation 
3 
E Tui 
The Expelled 
Orion´s belt and sheath 
Six stars 
2, 3 
He Mata Te 
Tautoru 
The Eyes of the Beautiful  
 Three  
Bellatrix and possibly 
Meissa  
 and ȹ Ori 1 and 2  
Two “stars” 
2, 6 
He Kete 
Basket 
Possibly Aldebaran and  
 𝚫,𝝝,ε Tauri or Pegasus 
Four stars  
 
2, 6 
Ko Tau Erua Ehu 
Two Beautiful Firebrands 
Possibly Castor and 
Pollux  
 or Wezen and Adhara 
Two stars near Canis Major  
W&A: Antagonic to Antares, zenithal  
 star?  
2, 3, 6 
Ko Toe Ko Peu  
 Renga 
Wake of the Fine  
 Pickaxe/Energy 
Menkalinan and Capella 
Rnga is energy, but also to paint something 
 yellow or red (sacredness) 
2,, 5, 7 
Matariki 
The Small Eyes or 
 The Eyes of the Chief 
The Pleiades 
Six stars 
Announced: New Year; first harvests;  
 bountiful season; Bird-man races;  
 egg hunt in Dec. with Matamea,  
 Tau Ehu, and Tautoru  
2  
Pipiri 
The Deprived 
Clustered star pair on the 
tail end of Scorpius 
May have marked the December season 
1, 2, 4, 
5, 8, 9 
146 
Α.EDWARDS et al 
 
Mediterranean Archaeology and Archaeometry, Vol. 18, No 4, (2018), pp. 139-147 
Nga Rau Hiva 
The Sprout from Hiva or 
 Twins or The Weak 
The Hyades 
Hiva = Rapanui homeland 
6, 3, 5 
Nga Toa Rere 
The Flying Sugarcane 
Stars in Ursa Major 
- 
6 
Nga Vaka 
The Canoes 
Alpha & Beta Centauri 
Important for navigation 
Canoes of founders 
2, 5 
 
Taura Nukunuku The Nukunuku Rope 
Procyon and Gomeisa 
Two stars 
2, 6 
Tautoru 
The Three Handsome 
Ones  
Orion’s Belt 
Three stars  
Announced: colder rainy season  
 (with Tau Ehu); start of Paina  
 festivals; egg hunt (with Matariki  
 and Tau Ehu); time for planting 
Legendary father and 2 sons (from  
 Hiva) 
2 
Tatauro 
Cross 
Crux 
Te Tatauro (modern name) 
Four to five stars 
2  
Atutahi 
The Wayward One or 
 The First Apprentice 
Probably Canopus 
End of Paina (with Tautoru) 
Start of the planting season 
The first of all stars, chief of the others 
1, 3, 
3, 6 
Ko Para Tahiri 
Tahiri’s Club or Para´s 
Fan,  
 or Decayed Fan 
Probably Arcturus 
- 
3, 6 
Ko Te Mata 
Pu/Po  
 Nui 
Eye With a Big  
 Hole/Darkness 
Spica 
- 
6 
Mere 
Voice of Joy 
—Undetermined— 
 Some possibility it was 
Vega  
 or Corvus 
If Vega, marked: Opening of the eel  
 fishing season and ritual tattooing 
 at Orongo 
1, 3 
6, 7  
Pau 
Open Piercing  
—Undetermined— 
Probably one star  
Announced: Ill-omen when appearing  
 in Oct./Nov. with Tautoru and  
 Matamea  
3, 4, 6 
Po’o or Po Rongo O Rongo’s Darkness 
Probably Achernar 
- 
6 
Po’o or Po Roroa 
The Great  
 Darkness/Infinity 
Saiph 
- 
2 
Rei a Tanga 
Tanga’s Breastplate  
Betelgeuse  
Wife and mother of men of Tautoru 
2 
Tau Ehu or  
 Te Pou o Te 
Rangi 
Beautiful Firebrand or 
 The Post of the Sky 
Sirius 
Announced: colder rainy season with  
 Tautoru; Dec. egg hunt with Matariki  
 and Tautoru 
2, 3, 6 
Te Hau Vaero 
 
Roostertail Feather  
 Headdress 
Antares 
Rapanui zenithal star? 
 
2, 6 
Vari Koreha 
Fearsome Eel/Centipede 
 Curling Into a Circle 
Rigel 
- 
2, 6 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Would like to thank our informants Valentino Riroroko and Alberto Hotus, who both put in an extra amount 
of effort to share their knowledge with us, as elders and leaders of the Rapanui people. We would also like 
to extend our thanks to Christopher Browder who secured the copy of the unpublished field notes of Alfred 
Métraux, which proved invaluable to our studies. 
REFERENCES 
Belmonte, J. A., and Edwards, E. (2007) Astronomy and landscape in Easter Island: new hints at the light of 
ethnographic sources. Ethnography Papers for the Annual Meeting of the SEAC (European Society for 
Astronomy in Culture). XII Conference of the SEAC, held in Kecskemét, August 26-28, 2004. E. 
Pásztor (ed.). Strasbourg: Institute of Ethnology at Strasbourg University, 2007, pp. 79-85. 
Belmonte, J. A., and Edwards, E. (2011) Archaeoastronomy: Archaeology, topography and celestial land-
scape from the Nile to Rapa Nui. In Highlights of Spanish Astrophysics VI: Proceedings of the IX Scien-
tific Meeting of the Spanish Astronomical Society (SEA). M. R. Zapatero Osorio, J. Gorgas, J. M. 
Apellániz, J. R. Pardo, and A. Gil de Paz (ed.). Madrid: Sociedad Española de Astronomía, pp. 786-
796. 
Cristino, C., Vargas, P., and Izaurrieta R. (1981) Atlas Arqueológico de la Isla de Pascua. Universidad de Chile, 
Santiago, Editorial Universitaria. 
d’Ans, B. (2016) Moldes digitales de estructuras complejas y generación digital de paisajes culturales para 
estudios 
arqueo-astronómicos. 
R. 
Yachachiy 
(ed.). 
II 
Semester 
2016. 
Available: 
http://www.alberdi.de/MOLDIESCODIGPAIARQABARTIIS-16.pdf, retrieved February 4th 2017. 
RE-APPRAISAL OF APPLIED ASTRONOMIC OBSERVATION AT PAPA UI HETU’U, RAPA NUI 
147 
 
Mediterranean Archaeology and Archaeometry, Vol. 18, No 4, (2018), pp. 139-147 
d’Ans, B. (2014) Generación de paisajes culturales tipo fisheye para uso en planetarios digitales. Scientific 
paper delivered at the IV Annual Meeting of the Interamerican Society for Astronomy in Culture 
(SIAC), Instituto Peruano de Astronomía (I.P.A.), Planetarium Maria Reiche, Universidad Peruana 
de Arte ORVAL. Rio de Janeiro, October 16. 
Edwards, E., and Edwards’s A. (2010) Rapanui astronomy and ethnoastronomy: Flag 83 Expedition Report. 
Expedition Report, The Explorers Club, October. 
Edwards, E., and Edwards A. (2013) When the Universe Was an Island. Santiago, Hanga Roa Press, 2010. 
Edwards, E., and Belmonte J. A. (2004) The Megalithic astronomy of Easter Island: A reassessment. Journal 
For The History of Astronomy, Vol. 35, Part 4, N° 121, pp. 421-433. 
Edwards, E., and Clark, M. (n.d.) Preliminary report of possible astronomical relationships in Quadrangle 
31, Ahu Ra’ai, Easter Island, South Pacific. Unpublished.  
Edwards, E., and Clark, M. (1984) Sun, moon, and volcanoes on Easter Island. Scientific paper delivered at 
the First International Congress: Easter Island and Eastern Polynesia, Centro de Estudios de Isla de 
Pascua, University of Chile. Hanga Roa, September 6-11. 
Ferdon Jr., E. N. (1961) The Ceremonial site of Orongo. In Archaeology of Easter Island: Reports of the Norwegian 
Archaeological Expedition to Easter Island and the East Pacific. T. Heyerdahl and E. N. Ferdon Jr. (ed.). 
Santa Fe, School of American Research and Museum of New Mexico, Vol. I, pp. 221-72. 
Kirch, P. V. (2004) Solstice observation in Mangareva, French Polynesia: New perspectives from archaeology. 
Archives of the JAC, N° 18. 
Lee, G. (1992). The Rock Art of Easter Island: Symbols of Power, Prayers to the Gods. The Institute of Archaeology, 
UCLA, Monumenta Archaeologica, N° 17. 
Lee, G., and Liller, W. (1987) “The sun stones of Easter Island: A re-evaluation.” Archaeoastronomy, N° 11, 
pp. 1-11. 
Lewis, D. (1974) “Voyaging stars: aspects of Polynesian and Micronesian astronomy.” In Philosophical Trans-
actions for the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical, Physical, and Engineering Sciences, 
Vol. 276, Issue 1257, May, pp. 133-148. 
Liller, W. (1989) “The megalithic astronomy of Easter Island: Orientations of ahu and moai.” Archaeoastron-
omy, N° 13, 1989, pp. 21-48. 
Liller, W. (1993) The Ancient Solar Observatories of Rapanui: the Archaeoastronomy of Easter Island. Woodland, 
The Easter Island Foundation.  
Liller, W. (2000) Ancient Astronomical Monuments in Polynesia. In Astronomy Across Cultures: The History of 
Non-western Astronomy. H. Selin (ed.). Dordrecht, Kluwer Academic Publications, pp. 127-160. 
Liller, W. (2004) Hetu’u Rapanui: The Archaeoastronomy of Easter Island. In Asteroids to Quasars: A Symposi-
um Honouring William Liller.” P. M. Lugger and W. Liller (ed.). Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 267-286. 
Liller, W., and Duarte, J. (1986) Easter Island’s Solar ranging device, Ahu Huri A Urenga, and vicinity. Ar-
chaeoastronomy, N° 9, pp. 39-51.  
Makemson, M. (1941) The Morning Star Rises: An Account of Polynesian Astronomy. New Haven, Yale Universi-
ty Press. 
Métraux, A. (1960) Ethnology of Easter Island. Honolulu, Bernice P. Bishop Museum Press.  
Mulloy, W. (1975) A solstice-oriented ahu on Easter Island. In Archaeology and Physical Anthropology in Ocean-
ia, Vol. X, N° 1, pp. 13-18. 
Routledge, K. (1919) The Mystery of Easter Island: The story of an Expedition. London, Hazell, Watson, and 
Viney. 
Routledge, K. (1911-1923) Papers of Mrs. Katherine Scoresby Routledge relating Chiefly to Easter Island. 
Unpublished manuscript. Reels 1, 2, 3, 4, Pacific Manuscripts Bureau, Research School of Pacific 
Studies, The Australian National University, Canberra. 
