The Faulland Islands are cold, windy, and mostly very dark. Despite these extreme conditions, nearly 3,700 people have decided to make their home here, most of whom are British citizens. So, if the Faulland Islands are so cold and harsh, then why would anyone want to live there? And more importantly, why can't more people move there, even if they're British? As usual, it all starts with the Faulland's very unique geography. The Faulland Islands, an isolated archipelago in the South Atlantic Ocean, sit roughly 500 km east of Argentina's southern coast and 1,200 km north of Antarctica. The archipelago makes up around 776 islands in total. Two very large islands and then a few hundred more that vary from barren rocky outcrops to more substantial but still minor landforms that support agriculture and wildlife. All told, the islands cover approximately 12,000 km, making them larger than you might expect, with a total land area similar to that of Connecticut in the US or Northern Ireland in the UK. As far as the island's population goes, though, it's really just East Faulland and West Faulland, which are separated by the Faulland Sound, a narrow straight that runs north to south. These two main islands are very rugged and very hilly with the highest point Mount Boobborne reaching 705 m. The landscape is largely windswept and treeless shaped by powerful westerly winds known as the roaring 40s. These winds combined with a cool maritime climate result in temperatures that rarely exceed 18° C in summer or drop far below freezing in winter. And more to that point, rain and cloud cover are frequent, contributing to a bogggy pete richch terrain that covers much of the islands. Due to this wet and acidic soil, natural forests are non-existent, leaving only hardy shrubs and grasses. But because of its remoteness, the Faulland support a very unique ecosystem. Extensive grasslands dominate the islands, which, as it turns out, provide ample grazing land for sheep. In a weird way, the Faulland seem to be better attuned geographically to sheep than to people. In fact, sheep outnumber people on the island by a wide margin. All told, there are over 130 sheep for every person on the Faullands. It might be cold and windy, but at least Faulllanders have plenty of wool to keep them warm. Now, all that said, the most valuable resource isn't on land, but lies in the surrounding waters, which are rich in marine life, with fisheries contributing significantly to the island's economic prosperity. The exclusive economic zone, a border that surrounds the island by about 200 nautical miles, allows for regulated fishing of squid and other valuable species, generating substantial revenue for the island's population. The surrounding smaller islands numbering around 774 in total vary from barren rocky outcrops to more substantial landforms supporting agriculture and wildlife. Some of the most notable islands include Pebble Island, Saunders Island, and Sea Lion Island. Each with ecological importance, but otherwise similar geography to the main islands. The Faulland Islands isolation, unpredictable weather, and rugged terrain have historically shaped both human settlements and economic activity. The lack of roads outside of the only city of Stanley means that travel between settlements is often done by off-road vehicles, small aircraft, or boats. And while agriculture remains important, modern prosperity largely stems from offshore fishing rights and a growing tourism industry. Additionally, a small but significant British military presence, primarily stationed at the Mount Pleasant complex, contributes to the local economy, and provides security in the face of Argentina's continued claims over the islands. All of this begs the question, though, if these islands are so inhospitable and barren, why would anyone want to move there in the first place? Vacation season is almost upon us. But I've been traveling since January. Because of that, I treated myself to the muchneeded upgrade that I deserve with Quinc's highquality travel essentials at fair prices. Now, before I left for Asia back in January, I knew that I was going to need luggage that was sturdy, reliable, and functional enough to carry everything that I would need for months of travel. Which is why I chose Quinc's carry-on with a front pocket. It's got plenty of space for clothes, a dedicated laptop compartment that keeps things light, and it's tough. I've now taken it through four countries, over 15 destinations, multiple train rides, and even an overnight ferry, and it still looks brand new. Best of all, Quint prices their items 50 to 80% less than similar brands. And they only partner with factories that use safe, ethical practices and premium materials. I love that. So, for your next trip, treat yourself to the luxe upgrades you deserve from Quint. Go to quint.com/jff for 365day returns plus free shipping on your order. That's qu i nce.com/jff to get free shipping and 365day returns. [Music] quint.com/jff. Here's the thing about the Faulland Islands. Unlike most other parts of the world, when Europeans first landed on and colonized the region, there was nobody there. Which means that as far as human history goes, the Faulland Islands are pretty new. To this day, the earliest known sighting of the Faullands is still debated, but they were likely first observed by European explorers in the 1500s. Spanish, Portuguese, and English navigators all charted the islands with the first recorded landing attributed to English Captain John Strong in 1690. Strong named the straits separating the two main islands Faulland Sound after Vicount Faulland, a British nobleman, and the name was later applied to the entire archipelago. As you can already tell, despite being so remote, plenty of Europeans became very interested in the islands early on. And this will turn the Faullands into one of the messiest territorial disputes in the entire world. A dispute that lasts well into today. By the 1700s, the islands began attracting European settlement with France establishing the first known colony, Port Lewis, on East Faulland in 1764. A year later, unaware of the French presence, the British founded their own settlement at Port Eggmmont on West Faulland. The Spanish soon entered the picture, acquiring the French settlement in 1767 and renaming it Porto Solidad. Spain protested the British presence and by 1770 expelled them from Port Eggmmont. Though Britain later returned before ultimately abandoning its claim in 1774, Spain continued to maintain Porto Solidad until withdrawing in 1811, leaving the islands mostly uninhabited for the next decade. Following Spain's departure, the newly independent United provinces of the Rio de la Plata, the precursor to modern Argentina, asserted sovereignty over the Faullands. In 1820, the fledgling Argentine government sought to establish control by appointing Lewis Vernett as governor in 1829, who promoted settlement and economic activity, particularly sealing and fishing. However, in 1831, tensions escalated when Bernett clashed with American sealers, prompting a US naval intervention that left the settlement in ruins. In 1833, with the Faullands essentially abandoned once again, Britain reasserted its claim over the islands by dispatching a naval force to reestablish control. The small Argentine garrison that remained was removed and British rule was firmly established. With the land claimed, the islands remained a relatively obscure outpost of the British Empire throughout the 1800s and 1900s with the primary economic focus on sheep farming and maritime industries. During this time, the population grew slowly with settlers from Britain, particularly Scotland, forming the backbone of the population. It's at this point that it would seem like all was said and done with regards to who controls the Faullands. But things are just heating up. The geopolitical significance of the Faullands surged in the late 1900s. In 1982, Argentina under the military dictatorship of Leopoldo Galtieri invaded the islands, sparking the Faulland's war. The British government, led by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, launched a naval task force to reclaim the territory. After a 10-week conflict that resulted in the deaths of 649 Argentine and 255 British personnel, Argentina surrendered and British rule was reaffirmed. The war had lasting effects, not only shaping British Argentine relations, but also reinforcing the islanders British identity and commitment to self-governance. Since the war, the Faullands have undergone significant economic and infrastructural development. The discovery of valuable fishing grounds in the surrounding waters, as well as potential offshore oil reserves has boosted the island's wealth. A 2013 referendum saw an overwhelming majority of islanders vote to remain a British overseas territory, underscoring their desire to maintain the status quo despite Argentina's continued claims. To this day, Argentina still claims the Faulland Islands as their own under the name Isla Malvinus despite having no formal control of the islands. This is based on Spain's original claim to the islands made in 1767 which Argentina inherited when they were made independent, or so the Argentine government says, which leads us to the final question of this video. If the Faulland Islands are so harsh and barren and there are continuing territorial and geopolitical issues surrounding the islands, then why do people want to live there? And why don't they let anyone else, even British citizens, move [Music] in? It might not seem like the most hospitable place on the planet, but people who do live in the Faullands enjoy a high quality of life. Perhaps most surprisingly, the islands boast a strong economy fueled by lucrative offshore fishing rights, which have given the local government financial stability, which means Balanders benefit from high wages, robust and modern healthcare facilities, and a very, very low crime rate. In fact, it's been more than 30 years since the last reported murder on the island. For all of these reasons, it's perhaps not surprising that nearly 3,700 people have made their home here. The Faulland's combination of wealth, stability, and vast open space make it an attractive place to move to. Many islanders are drawn to the idea of living in a remote but modern environment surrounded by rugged landscapes, abundant wildlife, and a small but tightlyk knit community. More to that point, the islands are particularly appealing to those looking for a quiet outdoor focused lifestyle. Whether working in farming, fisheries, tourism, or government services, this might start sounding appealing to you even. Maybe you should move to the Faulland Islands to get away from it all. Well, it's not that simple. Despite being a British overseas territory, the Faulland Islands have some of the strictest immigration policies in the entire world that make it difficult for outsiders, including British citizens, to move and live there. While the islands boast a high standard of living, a strong economy, and a low population, residency is tightly controlled by the local government to maintain their unique culture, economy, and environment. Unlike the United Kingdom itself, where British citizens can freely live and work, moving to the Faullands requires a specific visa or work permit. The primary pathway to residency is through employment. As the Faulland Islands government prioritizes bringing in workers with essential skills that benefit the local economy, jobs in agriculture, fisheries, construction, and public services are in demand. But applicants must secure employment before they can relocate. But here's the thing. Even with a job offer, residency is not guaranteed as employers must demonstrate that no local worker can fill the role before hiring from abroad. These rules and regulations against even other British citizens might seem extreme. After all, wouldn't a small island with a low population want more people? Well, as it turns out, it can get pretty complicated when you're so isolated and have a very harsh climate to contend with. At its core, the infrastructure and resources within the Faullands are very limited. Because of this, the local Faulland government seeks to ensure that any population growth is sustainable. This is particularly important because the Faulland Islands have had population booms in the recent past. Between 1990 and 2000, the population grew by over 50%. Being such a small population with limited access to resources means that things like healthcare, housing, and transportation are not equipped to handle rapid expansion. As such, authorities must carefully regulate who is allowed to settle on the islands. Circling back to Argentina, another factor in the immigration restrictions is geopolitical. At its core, the Faullands remain a disputed territory with Argentina continuing to claim sovereignty over them. The local government and population, who overwhelmingly identify as British, are cautious about any policies that might undermine their identity or make them vulnerable to external influences. Maintaining a stable, self-sufficient community is seen as key to preserving their way of life and political autonomy. Basically, Faullanders are trying to balance their population. They wish to stay British, so they don't want too many Argentina immigrants moving there, but at the same time, they don't want too many British to move there either, and thus risk further escalation with Argentina. It's a delicate dance that they play very well. Despite all of these numerous restrictions, there are some paths for people who wish to move to the Faullands. Skilled professionals in high demand sectors such as teachers, healthcare workers, and engineers will have better chances of securing work permits. And investors and entrepreneurs who can contribute to the economy may also find opportunities. Basically, if you want to live there, I'd suggest looking for jobs right now because it might take a while. And of course, even if you're a British citizen, moving to the Faullands is far from straightforward. Despite the island status as a British overseas territory, you might not be able to move to the Faullands. But what you can do is join me on my next adventure in Hanoi, Vietnam. This week, I'm exploring all of the chaos and grit that goes into Hanoi's old quarter, and you should come join me. I hope you enjoyed learning all about the Faulland Islands. If you did, you might be interested in this video all about Spalbard, which has a similar geography, but opposite immigration policy. Thanks for watching.