

[PDF page 1]
STUDIES IN THE HISTORY OF CHRISTIAN TRADITIONS 
Christianity, Latinity, 
and Culture 
Salvatore I. Camporeale, O.P. 
Edited by 
Patrick Baker e& Christopher S. Celenza 
BRILL 


[PDF page 2]
Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 
https://archive.org/details/christianitylati0000camp 


[PDF page 3]


[PDF page 4]


[PDF page 5]
Christianity, Latinity, and Culture 


[PDF page 6]
Studies in the History of 
Christian Traditions 
General Editor 
Robert J. Bast 
Knoxville, Tennessee 
In cooperation with 
Paul C.H. Lim, Nashville, Tennessee 
Eric Saak, Liverpool 
Christine Shepardson, Knoxville, Tennessee 
Brian Tierney, Ithaca, New York 
Arjo Vanderjagt, Groningen 
John Van Engen, Notre Dame, Indiana 
Founding Editor 
Heiko A. Obermant 
VOLUME 172 
The titles published in this series are listed at brill.com/shct 


[PDF page 7]
Christianity, Latinity, 
and Culture 
Two Studies on Lorenzo Valla 
By 
Salvatore I. Camporeale, O.P. 
Translated bch CAT Ts Christian Univ. Library Patrick Baker 8787 W. Alameda Ave. 
Bilited by Lakewood, CO 80226 
Patrick Baker 
Christopher S. Celenza 
With Lorenzo Valla’s Encomium of Saint Thomas Aquinas 
Edited and translated by 
Patrick Baker 
LEIDEN - BOSTON 
2014 


[PDF page 8]
Cover illustration: Detail of Filippino Lippi (ca. 1457-1504), Triumph of St. Thomas Aquinas over 
the Heretics, fresco, 1489-1492 (Cappella Carafa, Santa Maria sopra Minerva, Rome), depicting the 
equestrian statue of Marcus Aurelius in front of the Lateran (courtesy of Scala Archives). 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Camporeale, Salvatore I. 
Christianity, latinity, and culture : two studies on Lorenzo Valla / by Salvatore I. Camporeale ; 
translated by Patrick Baker ; edited by Patrick Baker, Christopher S. Celenza ; with Lorenzo Valla's 
Encomium of Saint Thomas / edited and translated by Patrick Baker. 
pages cm. -- (Studies in the history of Christian traditions, ISSN 1573-5664 ; VOLUME 172) 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-90-04-26196-9 (hardback : alk. paper) -- ISBN 978-90-04-26197-6 (e-book) 1. Valla, 
Lorenzo, 1407-1457. De falso credita et ementita Constantini donatione declamatio. 2. Constitutum 
Constantini. 3. Popes--Temporal power--Early works to 1800. 4. Valla, Lorenzo, 1407-1457. Encomion 
s. Thomae. 5. Thomas, Aquinas, Saint, 1225?-1274. I. Valla, Lorenzo, 1407-1457. De falso credita 
et ementita Constantini donatione declamatio. English II. Valla, Lorenzo, 1407-1457. Encomion 
s. Thomae. English III. Title. 
BX875.D7C36 2013 
282--dc23 
2013034464 
This publication has been typeset in the multilingual “Brill” typeface. With over 5,100 characters 
covering Latin, IPA, Greek, and Cyrillic, this typeface is especially suitable for use in the 
humanities. For more information, please see www. brill.com/brill-typeface. 
ISSN 1573-5664 
ISBN 978-90-04-26196-9 (hardback) 
ISBN 978-90-04-26197-6 (e-book) 
Copyright 2014 by Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, The Netherlands. 
Koninklijke Brill NV incorporates the imprints Brill, Global Oriental, Hotei Publishing, 
IDC Publishers and Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, translated, stored in 
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written permission from the publisher. 
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use is granted by Koninklijke Brill NV 
provided that the appropriate fees are paid directly to The Copyright Clearance Center, 
222 Rosewood Drive, Suite 910, Danvers, MA 01923, USA. 
Fees are subject to change. 
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
MIX 
Paper from 
responsible sources 
FSC wwwtscoa FSC C109576 ; é an Printed by Printforce, the Netherlands 


[PDF page 9]
The editors dedicate this posthumous volume to the memory of 
Salvatore I. Camporeale 


[PDF page 10]
__ he Deets Heme, ap eqns 
sera oe 
< Laanes ot angie aeagiegii nites . 
a 
—<— 
— ow of i ara ed ney a a 
peoeatinee vontew of Mamcnn Saastire tlm of Tye Letums | 
~ 
eer aren 
ein seal todipes | ome co lees ww cnt alt ey Seleatoos & Caumpormale : 
wmnteadint We Peryacd fon ot ae Cpl. taint em sare 
Creampies ao! eon, Fa eee | wet Papi k Rabo = 
Be pi enkias ‘ni em Nesey odin Pe as VRAIN 7 
hao ene pe chee... ° a 
WEN gtemy ss lt tt don a alla, 
bites, cer tasy To Gon weds ot datnriond docdame tin ; 
Fame » Pogee Sncecy) Sy emiefialie ccmtie te views @. Valle Lrrman, 1941487. Be 
Whee 5 Teese Anmnts Nerth adem, f Vill, Lommtny senprenyy: Se 
, paioamenae os a, 
oO 
> 
a 
nS 
7 Repent an a nary 
hear : ~“ 
r = 
Soommeieex een Sea he coos 


[PDF page 11]
CONTENTS 
Introduction: Salvatore Camporeale and Lorenzo Valla ..ssssccssssssssssssssssseess 
Christopher S. Celenza 
Lorenzo Valla and the De falso credita donatione: Rhetoric, 
Freedom, and Ecclesiology in the Fifteenth Century......ssssssseseessesen 
Salvatore I. Camporeale 
1 Introduction to a Reinterpretation of the De falso 
CLEALEE COMMU C Cee EOE ee 
SS) 
4 Section I of the Oration and Parallel Passages in 
BV eALLeh S VV OURS coresacaphrnuvesneisrontvschovab enortaanttooen rspecsbevant edtacaeatkacs hasserorrsesiney? 
5 The Body of the Oration: From Section III to Section VI.......:.sss+ 
6 Section IV: From the Constitutum Constantini to the 
CTE TI AE SLY CUI a nstscxssn ts onasguiesscotcnascgesserucvinshujonsserigggti sorties ceusieeganrnresh tor 
Gye1e VRC OTE STULTLELITID cas occ roace Sos can son taoeaesessseetecacguviccecosseesvuaene setae eee 
litle CUE TICS VOSUE erecrreneas nave esestanegsosesesenes ven coateccsezoreve cesnazensschcaat 
7 Section V: From the Pactum Hludovicianum to the 
respublica romana; Valla’s Anti-Caesarism in Opposition 
tO AUGUSTINE. ........zssssseesreessessnscssssnsenesenesoncensecnssnnsenssnvecrssensssesevorenesenesonenecene 
7.1 The Hludovicianum and the “Transfer of the Empire” 
RPL ATO ERAT) OEE a ee ee 
7.2. From imperium to respublica: The “Second Part” of 
SEC LIOID V serocnrsreresagzascasccvarragecucesausaspepaapagecineteonpinoerhgrnsogasvenspascnvonvensoveat? 
7.3 From Valla to Augustine: The Critique of the 
CLEV Of, COG seep czecpensscossocnrtastgigsontesescvoreaserggrnenssedsvsnovs sasuponavasazeeccnnerscoree 
8 Epilogue: Valla’s Defense of the Oration in his Letters to 
ROSIPGUEEALS PTOI SANYAL LAN ORIN Mesa sensesspracvgrnoconssseesascaseenessscagetoenissnssver 
The Antinomy of imperium and evangelit .vrsecssesrrsecssneesssessneens 


[PDF page 12]
viii CONTENTS 
Lorenzo Valla between the Middle Ages and the Renaissance: 
The Encomium of St. ThOMAS — 1457 se--ssseersesessnescenesccneessnsscennsecensecsnsesees 
Salvatore I. Camporeale 
1 At the Origins of Neo-Thomism in the Fifteenth Century............ 
11 The Literary Encomium and the Iconographic 
“Triumph” of St. Thomas Aquinas in the Dominican 
iB PaO UK AOD a Veena sea eI oe een parry ero 
1.2 The History of Thomism and the Centrality of the 
Summa Theologiae in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth 
COVES Gia We VAS Ve aR I Ea i No a eae 
1.3 Valla’s Encomium: Its Place in History and Cultural 
SILL TTT ELSE FAG sycerrey sein RPO Pir Pere TSS cre see Praesens 
1.4 The Cappellone degli Spagnoli in Florence (Second Half 
of the Fourteenth Century) and the Cappella Carafa in 
Rome (End ofthe Fifteenth Century )sccccccssr-cccresssssersonwesnossape<n, 
2 SETUCOMTUTIE Of SEAUIOTIVOS ssersssuscdencerscoetesnceranienasonnconstendtsvenseGencsruaigonssaueens 
2.1 -EXOTGMMAM ANG! DIVINE LAVOCALOD csscacsasttpecn cries Leenseseonecsicoatessens 
2.2 The narratio and the Liturgical Celebration of the 
2.3 Probatio and refutatio, the Central Section of the 
EPCOT oo cSencstasossausscirontesconsnesascnao ves cox sunesvernssenntrseisssonudeorstastasstnesea 
2.4 Knowledge, the Second Thematic Unit.........-c--sevsscsssssssnnsers 
2.5 Valla’s Critique of Scholasticism and the Controversy 
between Thomism and Anti-Thomism in the 
hits TH ES (aN) 5 ee EE ir a aieialine 
2.6 The Stylistic Qualities of Thomas’s Writings 
ANGINe Canons Or LAUN RM CtOLIC soe caveccsncccnsoonsvencustovecie cess 
2.7 The Critique of Scholastic Speculation and the 
Humanist Refounding of Theological Study .........sssssscsseeeee 
2.8 Philosophy as an “Impediment” to Authentic Christian 
Thought and the Distinction/Opposition between 
Patristic Theology and Scholasticism........cssssscssssessseesssseesssees 
2.9 The Reduction of Philosophy to Rhetoric and 
Valla’s Quintilianism 
2.10 The Linguistic-Semantic Critique of Scholasticism and 
the Interrelation between Greek and Latin 
2.11 Peroration and Closing of the Encomium 
POPP oer oee rere ee ee reso eee SOE SEO E TODO O OOOO OO ST EOE E EOE EEE SHOE HOE OSOES 
PoP oeoeoveeroesoeccoecoooooeS 
Pe eeecrecccverereeerecevocoeeooes 


[PDF page 13]
CONTENTS ix 
Ae ETE AD ORIAS Ol SCI Ol ASEC ISIN rier casesreesecetasts auctioneers 203 
Bie PIMtOSOPIly) Lie GLO green tinted erasecp ecru tasaareccehene he 203 
3.2 Dialéctic/Rhetorid h EA Sa ee oa occsccdscsccnsnccdesccecess 234 
4 Rhetoric as a Mode of Theologizing: The Humanist Solution 
Olen e BLOOD CH Dee me tation ceca eee nee cease 254 
4.1 The proemium to Book IV of the Elegantide.......sssssesssssneeee svi 
4.2 The Letter to Eustochium and Jerome’s Dream .ov.ssesssesessseesseeses 25,7 
4.3. The Mechanical Arts, the Liberal Arts, and the 
AGUITASELATN RENE O Ba scscoeese tte seccseisstcarciemniteosactsceserrcasteanertonie eee oe 263 
4.4 The Opposition between Philosophical Theology and 
Rhetorical Theology, and the Critical Reduction of the 
Vulgate to the Greek Truth (veritas Graeca)....sssssesesesesneeees 276 
4.5 The Preface to Thucydides’ History, Nicholas V’s 
Literary Project, and the Question of “Translation” ............. 281 
4.6 The Arts and Sciences as a Middle Ground (medietas).......... 287 
4.7 Erasmus’s Humanism from the Antibarbari to the 
PAL ELOTE CLOTIG carretera reree eet ee anet rozseansrsesteneéoonporeheeieonsneseoo sees 291 
Lorenzo Valla, Encomium of St. ThOMAS AQuiNiAS .w.sresesseseeseeeessessneersnesenniee 297 
Patrick Baker (ed. and tr.) 


[PDF page 14]
Arh eT sinus 
Yu hens icine leat ated &P 
nee Sola ep Poa 
lopmrapaleeed Neaterpoan lla occas 
hn peednn sins Daten i 
ee Te carr ape) thee Lina! Sete inarias of the 
eee wb ia ; 
fo ma Uectrey dp) “ee Poncdem gm (hee 
PeRwae + amas naner cqcepentied saan rn ie 
ai) Yom ie wy halen eg eset Wivtelgs 
me ven ” Leas Brewny.... er 179 
oo ter (emmar @ COKER Pemeelasien att +0 
“Yiguabh 4 eats @ Setngnd Ghee .. 1 | | 
© Malin mda bs Pine Lowa” to Ander Cartesian 
Mined, a3." 6s | irae on 
Capi, “wade ef ————— ihe ’ 
Be tis tee ety tani te Riitiatleans 
alles -ewiUbotam 
a slur Lirapudeiis ‘-—o 
Be plate — 
Sa Pwtyeecire, ape x, 
a => <a eee eee 16 
a. ? i - 
am OM 
| 


[PDF page 15]
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 
1 Andrea di Bonaiuto (fl. 1343-1377), Triumph of the 
Catholic Doctrine Embodied by St. Thomas Aquinas, 
fresco, 1365-1367. Cappellone degli Spagnoli, Santa 
Maria Novella, Florence (courtesy of Scala Archives) Po ceereereeconoeeeeeeeceeoes 
2 Filippino Lippi (ca. 1457-1504), Triumph of St. Thomas 
Aquinas over the Heretics, fresco, 1489-1492. Cappella 
Carafa, Santa Maria sopra Minerva, Rome (courtesy of 
Scala Archives) Perera 


[PDF page 16]
- 
ae 
-) > i SS Pe 
= ; e : o— ey “A 
" 7 : SMOMARTEU I 40 Tal) 
= as a ud 
i . silt fecdenaunst iltvet~gret. MN) aiutenod ibanbaA + 9 
> a doaips eamodt 22 yd bathodmd antrioad wllodted |” 
“sista Mongag?, itysh scolloyqn3 Sag ~ Pex Ave a) 
4 OB rr janes nnnanel COVER ub qa) 4 sumnolt allavol oheM | 4 ; 
anewostt Je Yo elqurinidT (wont tags ao) Sqqhd unig tlt 
allaqgs”) Sepr-janr olerd goles od? veo nh 
. hea eens teter) arwodl nrioniM sige shah shite ve 
“Wiens Am Viwaopet cmemmaneaane san oaeenibaies 
Fine. o 
¥ 
2 Ce 
— 
 - 
_ — 
7 
> —_ 
a he 
Sh 
is = 
_ a 
SS ee 
—- — 
~ _ = n 
_ : ee 
Ts 
: = 
—- : 
’ 
, 


[PDF page 17]
NOTE ON THE TRANSLATION 
My intention has been to translate the work of Salvatore Camporeale not 
only into English but into readable English. His Latinate and at times 
highly technical style can be difficult to navigate, and it seemed that the 
service of translation would be less if the text were simply rendered ad 
litteram into an equally intractable analog. Thus long sentences have been 
broken up and paragraph divisions reformatted, and wherever possible 
extremely dense or opaque formulations have been unpacked. Whether 
this has been done excessively or insufficiently is for the reader to judge. 
Those intent on recovering Camporeale’s pristine intention can, of course, 
avail themselves of the original. 
Both essays translated here first appeared in Italian in the journal 
Memorie Domenicane and were reprinted, with minimal revision, in the 
2002 volume Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma: studi e 
testi. Occasionally very small portions of Camporeale’s text have been 
omitted or altered when made irrelevant or redundant in the process of 
translation. Typographical errors have been silently corrected. Every effort 
has been made to provide precise citations for quotations, which 
Camporeale, writing in another era of scholarship and assuming his read- 
ers knew the sources thoroughly, often did not provide. No systematic 
attempt has been made to update the bibliography, though when possi- 
ble English translations or original English editions of works cited by 
Camporeale in Italian have been supplied. Such bibliographical and other 
editorial additions, including a sprinkling of explanatory footnotes, appear 
in square brackets. The essay, “Lorenzo Valla between the Middle Ages and 
the Renaissance: the Encomium of St. Thomas — 1457,’ appears here in 
slightly modified form: a lengthy appendix featuring a comparative read- 
ing of Aquinas’s commentary on St. Paul’s letters with Valla’s Adnotationes 
has been omitted, while a Latin text and a new English translation of the 
Encomium have been added. 
All translations of Latin sources are mine except where noted. The 
greatest borrowing of the work of others has occurred with Valla’s Oration 
on the Donation of Constantine, for which I have made use of the transla- 
tion by G.W. Bowersock in the I Tatti Renaissance Library. It has, however, 
been necessary at times to modify his renderings to fit the context of 
Camporeale’s work; all such departures are noted. In translating primary 


[PDF page 18]
xiv NOTE ON THE TRANSLATION 
sources, I have generally tried to adhere to the interpretation Camporeale 
gave them. 
Camporeale’s Italian has presented many challenges, not least of which 
is the consistent translation of key terms used somewhat idiosyncratically. 
Of the greatest moment is statuto, a word whose original meaning in juris- 
prudence is “statute, charter, constitution” but which in the realm of sci- 
ence and scholarship is applied metaphorically to denote something along 
the lines of “theoretical foundations.” Here statuto has been translated 
thus but also as either “principle” or “guideline,” such as in the phrase, “a 
humanist principle of theology” (statuto umanistico della teologia). 
Another stumbling block has been gnoseologico, an adjective seemingly 
synonymous with epistemologico. Yet Camporeale sometimes uses 
“gnoseological” and “epistemological” as a pair in a way that seems to sug- 
gest that more than mere pleonasm is at stake. Caution and respect have 
recommended retaining this usage. Similarly, the terms compossibilita and 
incompossibilita have been retained, as in “the incompossibility between 
theology and philosophy” or the “compossibility between classical litera- 
ture and sacred scripture.” Here the sense seems to extend beyond simple 
“compatibility” to denote “able to be engaged in at the same time by the 
same person’ or “able to co-exist simultaneously.’ 
In dealing with these and other difficulties I have benefitted from 
invaluable assistance and advice, especially from Maurizio Campanelli, 
Amos Edelheit, Jim Hankins, Lodi Nauta, Christian Peters, and Iolanda 
Ventura. Furthermore, the readers for Brill, in particular Scott Blanchard, 
caught numerous errors and offered several helpful insights. Gratitude 
must also be expressed to my wife Katrin for graciously making room for 
the figure of Salvatore Camporeale in our life. My greatest thanks, finally, 
go to Chris Celenza for embracing the idea of this project, for obtaining a 
grant from Villa I Tatti, and for meticulously reading through the transla- 
tion and making countless suggestions for improvement. 
Patrick Baker 
Rome, 2013 


[PDF page 19]
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The editors would like to thank Memorie Domenicane for permission to 
translate Camporeale’s essays, which originally appeared in its pages: 
“Lorenzo Valla e il De falso credita donatione. Retorica, liberta ed ecclesio- 
logia nel ‘400,” Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 19 (1988): 191-293; and “Lorenzo 
Valla tra Medioevo e Rinascimento. Encomion s. Thomae — 1457,” Memorie 
Domenicane, n.s., 7 (1976): 1-194. We would also like to thank the I Tatti 
Renaissance Library for permission to use G.W. Bowersock’s translation of 
Valla’s Oration on the Donation of Constantine (On the Donation of 
Constantine, tr. G.W. Bowersock [Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 2007]), as well as the Monumenta Germaniae Historica for permis- 
sion to reprint large portions of Wolfram Setz’s critical text of the Latin 
Oration (De falso credita et ementita Constantini donatione, ed. Wolfram 
Setz [Weimar: Bohlau, 1976], Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Quellen 
zur Geistesgeschichte des Mittelalters, 10). This volume was made possi- 
ble in part thanks to a Lila Acheson Wallace — Reader’s Digest Publications 
Subsidy from Villa I Tatti, The Harvard University Center for Italian 
Renaissance Studies. It was put into final form at the American Academy 
in Rome, where Patrick Baker resided in 2012-2013 as the Lily 
Auchincloss Post-Doctoral Rome Prize Fellow in Renaissance and Early 
Modern Italian Studies. 
P.B. and C.C. 


[PDF page 20]
ef ewe co TT aanttLATiiin 
amy | hae gemenelly ted te aittiem co the ti rpastaniod aap 
- bs 73 
ales (CUCEMa UL AW tialienyes, aot beast of whick ~~ 
: - : 7 erie B mc Soe what idiogwic catically . 
TT a) preening in hitless i Swale w WW) arene ori wane yube ay ‘at biow f : Pipl 
sap GUT) Le 
TopNY wl ii an ey oe mgir0 pees ry ae a oltarit at 4 The Tang A wel’ ’ r ) 
fails ie dcats aes sagweey) aye tbs ae Bel Se if'> alle ch bea Bes a2 te? * "i ee ren oh te 
testy tio gu Cet stat Oi Bt mys awaits Taroumaba® ipa | 1 oe ar 
Ww aa Yc > ‘miemwts . @ j aA : mz" Darsrabhenty 
¢ a nat sfc 
beech pull ysttin bishiw w “i ir . Bret a 
hadtetesay) sane Ys } a r al 
i mani in. . my snhiieho 3 a a ie 
DY Speen ls eli ie Tike 
reeset leila a= Shee | ae area 
stint at sortie sho Wiewiung) otk 
rel WY \alux Liptay 0-3 ae 
Macibeet emake vif. = ’ 
aif } Oke T9Mi at yi e4 
Th ball J no in erent: af Pier 
phe te! 7 byrruald ortt idtay 
. tT tien 
% LU ae LOD ne ia Lo “ ™ A ny pest e720 4s 2 
AT ithe is 8 lh Copel mola vice 
hud pict ur passat am wrt Ee Sas sana ‘ 
heed an ee 
Laban Live, » 
Cua 
Nar 
135 ee. aaell> fw gracanals Rahtisg rowta for 
Verat be tee Whe Ve preter thanks finally, 
re - RO GP Ges =! wis prngect, for obtelninygg a of —— ocr vO 4) ie threewets the tranala- 
7 fin =r, 
— 
=~ a 
= << 


[PDF page 21]
INTRODUCTION: 
SALVATORE CAMPOREALE AND LORENZO VALLA 
Christopher S. Celenza 
Italian Renaissance studies lost one of its most valued scholars on 17 
December 2002, when the Dominican scholar Salvatore Camporeale 
passed away. Camporeale’s life took him from southern Italy (where he 
was born in 1928, in Bari), to California (where he attended a small Catholic 
college, St. Albert’s, receiving his Bachelor’s degree in 1950), Pistoia, 
Florence, and to visiting lectureships all over the world. He was a regular 
visitor to the Johns Hopkins University, where he taught yearly mini- 
courses from the early 1980s until the later 1990s. And he was a beloved 
interlocutor for many years at Villa I Tatti, the Harvard University Center 
for Renaissance Studies in Settignano, near Florence, where Camporeale 
had his real and final home, in the Dominican community of Santa Maria 
Novella. After his death, no less than three publications in his honor 
appeared, testimony to the immense esteem Camporeale enjoyed among 
his students and colleagues worldwide, all the more noteworthy since he 
never held a permanent university position.} 
While Camporeale wrote on different topics, his principal contribution 
to scholarship came in his studies of the fifteenth-century thinker 
Lorenzo Valla (1406-57), a Roman intellectual whose historical, literary, 
1 See Francesco Ciabattoni and Susanna Barsella (eds.), The Humanist’s Workshop: 
Special Issue on Salvatore I. Camporeale, special issue of Italian Quarterly, vol. 46 (179-182 = 
Winter to Fall, 2009), entire issue (there see Susanna Barsella, “Biocritical Note,’ 15-17 and 
“Bibliography,” 19-21, for a list of Camporeale’s publications); Walter Stephens (ed.), Studia 
Humanitatis: Studies in Honor of Salvatore Camporeale (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 2004), supplement to Modern Language Notes 11g (2004); and a section of 
the Journal of the History of Ideas 66 (2005): 477-556: Salvatore Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla, 
Humanism, and Theology, edited by Melissa Meriam Bullard, with essays by Bullard, “The 
Renaissance Project of Knowing: Lorenzo Valla and Salvatore Camporeale’s Contributions 
to the Querelle between Rhetoric and Philosophy” (477-81); Christopher S. Celenza, 
“Lorenzo Valla and the Traditions and Transmissions of Philosophy” (483-506); Brian 
P. Copenhaver, “Valla Our Contemporary: Philosophy and Philology” (507-25); Mariangela 
Regoliosi, “Salvatore Camporeale’s Contribution to Theology and the History of the 
Church” (527-39); and Nancy S. Struever, “Historical Priorities” (541-56). There are profiles 
of Camporeale posted by Villa I Tatti (accessed 12.17.2012: http://www.itatti.it/camporeale 
_memoriam.htm) and Santa Maria Novella (accessed 12.17.2012: http://www.smn.it/ 
convento/campo.htm). 


[PDF page 22]
2 CHRISTOPHER S. CELENZA 
and philosophical works proved influential, both in his own epoch and, 
more noticeably, after their rediscovery in the twentieth century. 
Camporeale took part in that wave of rediscovery (indeed he was one of 
its prime movers), and his work served to introduce serious analysis of 
Valla into the then highly specialized scholarly conversation on the intel- 
lectual history of Renaissance Italy. Little of Camporeale’s work has 
appeared in English, despite his international reputation; and now that 
study of Lorenzo Valla has grown, aided by new editions and translations 
of his work as well as by recent scholarship, the time has come to present 
in book form the two monographs that Camporeale believed best encap- 
sulated his life-long work on this important Renaissance thinker.” To set 
these studies in context, it is worthwhile to spend a little time with Valla 
and on the two main works under discussion in this volume before mov- 
ing on to Camporeale’s own background and guiding assumptions. 
Lorenzo Valla’s key preoccupations lay in the realms of the Latin lan- 
guage, Christianity, and culture. He saw those three areas as linked, believ- 
ing them mutually interdependent. Both of the texts on which Camporeale 
focuses here, Valla’s treatise on the Donation of Constantine and his 
Encomium of Saint Thomas Aquinas, serve as keystones to Valla’s thoughts 
and to Camporeale’s vision of Valla’s importance. Both texts, especially 
that on the Donation, have had traditional interpretations that are accu- 
rate on the surface but that, in light of Camporeale’s examination, reveal 
much more: about Valla, about the history of philology, and about the his- 
tory of institutional Christianity.? 
2 For recent editions, translations, and bibliography, see Christopher S. Celenza, 
“Lorenzo Valla’s Radical Philology: The “Preface” to the Annotations to the New Testament 
in Context,” Journal of Medieval and Early Modern Studies 42 (2012), 365-394; Lorenzo 
Valla, Dialectical Disputations, ed. and tr. Brian P. Copenhaver and Lodi Nauta, 2 vols. 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2012); Lodi Nauta, In Defense of Common 
Sense: Lorenzo Valla’s Humanist Critique of Scholastic Philosophy (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 2009); Mariangela Regoliosi (ed.), Lorenzo Valla: La riforma 
della lingua e della logica, 2 vols. (Firenze: Polistampa, 2010); eadem (ed.), Lorenzo 
Valla e lumanesimo toscano (Firenze: Polistampa, 2009); eadem (ed.), Pubblicare il 
Valla (Firenze: Polistampa, 2008); Lorenzo Valla, Raudensiane note, ed. Gian Matteo 
Corrias (Firenze: Polistampa, 2007); Lorenzo Valla, Encomion Sancti Thome, ed. Stefano 
Cartei (Firenze: Polistampa, 2008); Lorenzo Valla, Ad Alfonsum regem Epistola de duobus 
Tarquiniis and Confutationes in Benedictum Morandum, ed. Francesco Lo Monaco (Firenze: 
Polistampa, 2009); Lorenzo Valla, Emendationes quorundam locorum ex Alexandro ad 
Alfonsum primum Aragonum regem, ed. Clementina Marsico (Firenze: Polistampa, 2009). 
3 See Lorenzo Valla, On the Donation of Constantine, ed. and tr. G.W. Bowersock 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2007); there the Latin edition is based on 
Lorenzo Valla, De falso credita et ementita Constantini donatione, ed. Wolfram Setz, in the 
Monumenta Germaniae Historica, 10 (Weimar: Bohlau, 1976); Wolfram Setz, Lorenzo Vallas 


[PDF page 23]
INTRODUCTION: SALVATORE CAMPOREALE AND LORENZO VALLA 3 
The basic contours of Valla’s life and work are easy enough to sketch, at 
least in broad outline.* Roman in origin, he was raised in the environment 
of the papal court, and he spent part of his youth in the company of an 
uncle, Melchior Scrivani, himself a curialist.5 Valla spent much of his life 
trying to become part of the papal court. It was not until 1447 that he suc- 
ceeded, when he obtained a position at the court of Nicholas V (the for- 
mer Tommaso Parentucelli), a great supporter of humanistic studies.° In 
the intervening years, Valla spent a significant amount of time at the 
Neapolitan Court of Alfonso of Aragon, and it was there that he drafted 
most of his major works, the treatise on the Donation of Constantine 
among them. Other works that date from this period include Valla’s 
Annotations on the New Testament, in which he applies his knowledge of 
the Greek language to the Latin Vulgate translation of the New Testament, 
which Valla argues does not always reflect adequately the meaning of the 
Greek text; a dialogue On Pleasure, in which Valla’s interlocutors take dif- 
ferent positions regarding the place of pleasure in Christian life; a dialogue 
On Free Will, in which Valla confronts the classic question of the relation- 
ship between divine omniscience and human free will; his On the 
Profession of the Religious, a dialogue in which Valla, through his interlocu- 
tors, argues that sincere Christian religiosity cannot be measured by the 
taking of religious vows; his Pruning, or Re-digging up, of all Dialectic, an 
ambitious attempt on Valla’s part to reframe the way logic was studied 
and conceived in the late middle ages; and, among other works, his 
Schrift gegen die Konstantinische Schenkung, De falsa credita et ementita Constantini dona- 
tione: Zur Interpretation und Wirkungsgeschichte. Bibliothek des Deutschen Historischen 
Instituts in Rom, 44 (Tiibingen: Niemeyer, 1975); Johannes Fried, Donation of Constantine 
and Constitutum Constantini: The Misinterpretation of a Fiction and its Original Meaning 
(Berlin: de Gruyter, 2007); Alfred Hiatt, The Making of Medieval Forgeries: False Documents 
in Fifteenth-Century England (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 136-74; and 
for the Encomium, see the edition of Cartei, as in previous note. 
4 The most complete biography is still Girolamo Mancini, Vita di Lorenzo Valla (Firenze: 
Sansoni, 1891). In a vast sea of studies, for basic orientation, see, in addition to the cited 
studies, Jill Kraye, “Lorenzo Valla and Changing Perceptions of Renaissance Humanism,” 
Comparative Criticism 23 (2001): 37-55; Maristella Lorch, “Lorenzo Valla,” in Renaissance 
Humanism: Foundations, Forms, and Legacy, ed. Alfred Rabil, 3 vols. (Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1988), 1:332—49. For a recent discussion on the meaning 
of Valla’s philosophical work, see W. Scott Blanchard, “The Negative Dialectic of Lorenzo 
Valla: A Study in the Pathology of Opposition,” Renaissance Studies 14 (2000): 149-189; and 
Lodi Nauta, “William of Ockham and Lorenzo Valla: False Friends, Semantics, and 
Ontological Reduction,” Renaissance Quarterly 56 (2003): 613-651. 
5 W. von Hofmann, Forschungen zur Geschichte der kurialen Behorden vom Schisma bis 
zur Reformation, 2 vols. (Rom: Loescher, 1914), 1: 232, 2:11; Mancini, Vita di Lorenzo Valla, 
1-24. 
6 Mancini, Vita di Lorenzo Valla, 226-78. 


[PDF page 24]
4 CHRISTOPHER S. CELENZA 
Elegances of the Latin Language, a guide to Latin usage that became Valla’s 
one major success in the early modern period (at least in terms of the 
number of extant manuscript copies and early printed editions), adopted 
as it was by many late fifteenth- and sixteenth-century educators as a 
reference work for teaching and learning correct Latin usage.’ 
Yet it is certainly his De falso credita et ementita Constantini donatione 
declamatio (Declamation on the falsely believed and lying Donation of 
Constantine) that has earned Valla his modern reputation. For it was in 
this treatise, so the story goes, that Valla used his knowledge of the Latin 
language to unmask a forgery, showing that some of the language used in 
the Constitutum Constantini (the document that represented the Donation 
of Constantine in written form) derived from a later period than that of 
the document itself. If Valla appears in textbooks of western history, it is 
this unmasking for which he is centrally featured, with his linguistic skill 
seen as a predecessor of scientific philology. Yet there is so much more to 
be said about this work and about Camporeale’s interpretation thereof, 
that it is worthwhile stepping back and examining the constituent parts, 
as it were. 
The first of these parts is the document of donation itself. The “Donation 
of Constantine” refers to the notional gift of the Emperor Constantine, 
whereby, converted to Christianity and ready to transfer the seat of impe- 
rial power from Rome to Byzantium, he decided to donate the western 
territories of the Empire to Pope Sylvester. The consensus of modern 
scholarship is that the document in which this gift was formalized (the 
Constitutum) was produced in the environment of the Papal Court in the 
eighth century; in other words, almost five centuries after the putative 
event.® It is often indicated, therefore, as a “forgery,” which at the most 
literal level it surely is. Yet it is productive to reflect on what a forgery 
might mean, not only in the pre-modern world but also in the pre-print 
world. Suppose that consensus emerged, in the eighth-century curial envi- 
ronment whose members went on to produce the document, that 
Constantine had indeed ceded the rights to the western territories to the 
7 On the Annotations, with literature, see Celenza, “Lorenzo Valla’s Radical Philology’; 
for the editorial state of play with respect to the other works mentioned, see Regoliosi 
(ed.), Pubblicare il Valla. 
8 Fried, Donation of Constantine and Constitutum Constantini, has made the important 
step of separating, conceptually, the “Donation” from the document, showing that each 
had, in a sense, a separate existence in different intellectual and cultural communities 
throughout the middle ages. This and the succeeding paragraph follow his emphasis; see 
also Hiatt, Making of Medieval Forgeries, 136—42, whose approach to the Donation has also 
informed what follows. 


[PDF page 25]
INTRODUCTION: SALVATORE CAMPOREALE AND LORENZO VALLA 5 
Pope. How central would a document be in “proving” that this donation 
had indeed taken place, in a world in which catastrophic loss of documen- 
tation was not uncommon? 
Medieval archives often possessed mechanisms for ensuring authenti- 
cation.? Yet given (what now seems like) the instability of the world of 
medieval documentary culture, arguments about proof were likely to 
include, and to hinge upon, more than simply documentation.!° Indeed, 
this is precisely what occurred during the medieval centuries in which the 
legitimacy of the donation (rather than the authenticity of the document) 
constituted matter for intense debate. To offer two from among a number 
of possible (and similar) examples, the historian and bishop Otto of 
Freising (114-58) did not discuss the Donation with reference to the 
Constitutum. Instead he wondered in his Chronicle how there could have 
been Emperors subsequent to Constantine who disposed of the very same 
land Constantine was supposed to have alienated." Even Gratian, the 
foremost of the early legal scholars at the University of Bologna (where the 
study of law was reborn in the middle ages) did not include the Constitutum 
in his Concordance of Discordant Canons. Though his immediate succes- 
sors added a version of the document, arguments for most of the middle 
ages turned on other factors: whether the Pope or Emperor was the 
supreme leader of Christendom, whether the Donation was legally possi- 
ble (did the Emperor have the right to alienate the property under discus- 
sion?), whether the Pope, with his ecclesiastical responsibilities, could 
legitimately have accepted such a gift, and so on. Different versions of the 
document circulated, needless to say, along with different summaries of 
the document. 
So it is unsurprising that much of Valla’s argumentation, too, turns on 
factors other than just the text of the Constitutum. He, like everyone in his 
era, took part in a culture shaped by manuscripts, and no one was more 
aware than Valla just how precarious these could be. The force of his argu- 
mentation is compelling, all of it rooted in Valla’s acute sense of history. If 
the claim sounds implausible that a powerful secular ruler, expert in mili- 
tary affairs, would simply hand over large swaths of property for which he 
and his predecessors had paid hefty prices in blood and treasure (“I find no 
9 Bernhard Bischoff, Latin Palaeography: Antiquity and the Middle Ages, tr. Daibhi 6 
Créinin and David Ganz (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 34-37. 
10 See, e.g., M.T. Clanchy, From Memory to Written Record: England, 1066-1307 (Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell, 2013), 295-329. 
1 Fried, Donation of Constantine and Constitutum Constantini, 13. 
2 Ibid., 19. 


[PDF page 26]
6 CHRISTOPHER S. CELENZA 
record of any king, pagan or Christian, turning an empire over to priests...”), 
Valla brings this implausibility into stark relief with a variety of techniques.”® 
These range from direct address to Constantine, to taking on the persona of 
Constantine’s sons (who ask their father how he could do something like 
alienating property that they, by right, should have inherited), “impersonat- 
ing” the Roman Senate (“Caesar, if you are unmindful of your own family, ... 
nevertheless the Senate and People of Rome cannot be unmindful of its 
right and reputation.... Shall we accept an Empire of those whose religion 
we scorn?”) and ventriloquizing Pope Sylvester (“I am a priest ... I could not 
be induced by any argument to agree with you unless I wished to be untrue 
to myself, forget my station, and almost deny my Lord Jesus”).!# 
There are significant arguments about the text itself, through which 
Valla shows himself a connoisseur of the traditions, history, and instability 
of different forms of writing. If, he asks, such a monumental donation 
indeed took place, why are there no other testimonies, such as would nor- 
mally have been expressed in the various traditional forms of public writ- 
ing (inscriptions, bronze tablets, and so on)? He writes: 
But this Donation of Constantine, so splendid and unexampled, can be 
proven by no document at all, whether on gold or on silver or on bronze or 
on marble or, finally, in books, but only, if we believe that man [here Valla 
refers to the person who added the Constitutum to Gratian’s Decretum] on 
paper or parchment.!® 
There are the etymological arguments for which Valla is justly celebrated, 
such as when he highlights the absurdity of the document containing the 
term “Constantinople” when “Byzantium” had not yet acquired that name, 
or when he shows that words are used that would have made no sense in 
the document's supposed chronological context (such as the use of the 
term “satrap,” for which there is no other contemporary evidence, or the 
use of the word “ecclesia” for “church” — referring to the building — when 
“templum’ would have been more appropriate in that case).1® 
The criticisms that Valla makes add up to more than an “unmasking” of 
a forged document. Taken together they amount to a strong critique of the 
Church as it situated itself in Valla’s day, which is to say as the custodian 
of universal Christendom, on the one hand and, on the other (and simul- 
taneously), a regional political power: 
18 The quotation comes from Valla, On the Donation of Constantine (tr. Bowersock), 12. 
14 The quotations come from ibid., 16 and 21, respectively. 
8 Tbid., 39. 
16 Tbid., 45, 42, 47, respectively. 


[PDF page 27]
INTRODUCTION: SALVATORE CAMPOREALE AND LORENZO VALLA Vf 
The Pope himself makes war on peaceful nations and sows discord among 
states and rulers... Christ lies dying of starvation and exposure among so 
many thousands of poor.!” 
It is true that when Valla wrote this text he was in the employ of a ruler, 
Alfonse of Aragon, who was at odds with the then Pope, Eugenius IV. But 
the incisiveness, range, and sheer amount of Valla’s criticisms belie the 
notion that this text was little more than the product of a paid rhetorician. 
There is a vision behind the text about Christianity, Latinity, and culture, 
a vision also manifested in Valla’s Encomium of Saint Thomas, the second 
of the two texts around which Camporeale’s two studies revolve. 
Valla delivered the Encomium, an oration, on 7 March 1457, the feast 
day of St. Thomas Aquinas, at the seat of the Dominican Order in Rome, 
Santa Maria sopra Minerva.!§ As it turned out, this was his last work, and 
it stands as a small masterpiece of restrained reflection: restrained for 
Valla, that is. For here too, Valla launches a critique, but it is a subtler cri- 
tique than those to which readers of Valla are accustomed. He had been 
asked, after all, to speak at a commemorative occasion honoring Thomas 
Aquinas, and in so far as it was possible for him to do, given his guiding 
assumptions concerning philosophy and theology, he took the obligation 
seriously. As is often the case, his critique emerges not against an auctori- 
tas, in this case Aquinas, but rather against those who make uncritical use 
of the authority. Valla followed the same procedure, for example, when 
dealing with Aristotle in the Preface of his Repastinatio totius dialecticae, 
where it is not Aristotle himself but his uncritical followers who bear the 
brunt of critique.!® 
The entire Encomium, in fact, represents an attempt to put Aquinas in 
his proper place, in the most literal sense of that expression. Valla notes 
the difference, for example, between “martyrs,” who died because of their 
faith, and “confessors” (confessores), who “lived a chaste and spotless life 
accompanied by divine signs and miracles.’2° Aquinas is a “confessor,” 
and as such possessed innumerable virtues, but he was not a martyr, 
Valla reminds his audience, and he should not be accorded that sort of 
17 Tbid., 96. 
15 ein aaa to Camporeale’s own study, for context see the important work of John 
W. O'Malley, “Some Renaissance Panegyrics of Aquinas,” Renaissance Quarterly 27 (1974): 
174-92; idem, “The Feast of Thomas Aquinas in Renaissance Rome: A Neglected Document 
and Its Import,’ Rivista di storia della Chiesa in Italia 35 (1981): 1-27. 
19 See Valla, Dialectical Disputations, 2-43. 
20 The quotation is from Lorenzo Valla, Encomium of Saint Thomas, ed. and tr. Patrick 
Baker (in this volume, pp. 297-315), 2 (cited according to paragraph number). 


[PDF page 28]
8 CHRISTOPHER S. CELENZA 
veneration (unlike other Dominicans, such as Peter Martyr). Aquinas’s 
birth was prophesied, as was that of the Dominican Order’s founder, 
Dominic. Valla thenceforth begins what one might term a relational strat- 
egy, evaluating Aquinas against others to whom he has been compared. In 
this case, Dominic is a founder, and Thomas is a continuator, not to be 
regarded as on the same level as the founder, one assumes, but important 
nonetheless: 
Dominic founded the house of the Preachers; Thomas covered its floor with 
marble. Dominic built its walls; Thomas decorated them with the finest 
paintings. 
The impression is that there can be only one founder, but that there could 
have been more who contributed to ornamenting the original foundation. 
As it happened, Aquinas was the most prominent of those later contribu- 
tors, but he still should not be confused with the founder. 
Similarly, Valla has in mind the larger history of Christian thinkers, a 
history in which the early Church Fathers loom large, or at least ought to. 
Valla expresses surprise at how Aquinas has been regarded: 
It has not escaped me that certain people who held an oration here today 
on the same subject not only made Thomas second to none of the doctors of 
the Church but also placed him above them all. 
What is more, 
The reason they gave for being able to put him above everyone is that for 
proof in theology he used logic, metaphysics, and all philosophy, which the 
earlier doctors are supposed to have barely tasted with the tips of their 
tongues.?? 
Recognizing how risky it seems even to appear to criticize Aquinas on his 
feast day, in Rome’s central Dominican Church, Valla says that he still can- 
not disguise what he thinks. Furthermore, since he did not rise to speak of 
his own accord but was instead asked to do so by the Dominicans them- 
selves, he feels he must speak his mind. 
Valla has already adumbrated his two principal concerns: the need to 
protect the exemplary, authoritative status of the ancient Church Fathers 
and the concomitant desire to put the focus where he believes it belongs 
when treating of theology: not on dialectic and metaphysics but rather on 
the message of the early Church and of its earliest and greatest thinkers. 
21 Tbid., 9. 
22 bidsas, 


[PDF page 29]
INTRODUCTION: SALVATORE CAMPOREALE AND LORENZO VALLA 9 
These two themes dominate the remainder of the Encomium. Valla 
admires the copiousness of Aquinas's writings in sincere terms of praise 
but he also marvels, he says, at something else Aquinas is supposed to 
have said: “that he never read a book that he did not fully understand.”23 
What is the audience to think? That Valla offers sincere praise? Or that he 
is instead subtly mocking Aquinas for vaunting an omni-comprehensive 
intelligence no human being could achieve? Or could audience members 
believe either of the two opinions, depending on their predilections, 
receptivity to possible irony, or even depending on Valla’s delivery, some- 
thing about which we cannot know anything definitively? 
Valla goes on immediately to touch on one of the two themes 
mentioned: 
But those things which they call metaphysics and modes of signifying and 
the like, which modern theologians regard with wonder like a newly discov- 
ered sphere or like the epicycles of the planets, I regard with no great won- 
der at all.24 
Valla indicts what he sees as an overemphasis on metaphysics and dialec- 
tic at the expense of more important concerns. This move leads him to the 
other concern, the Church Fathers: 
This I will make clear not with my own arguments (although I could) but by 
citing the authority of the ancient theologians — Cyprian, Lactantius, Hilary, 
Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine — who were so far from treating such matters in 
their works that they did not even mention them. 
The Fathers do not devote themselves to detailed discussions of meta- 
physics and logic for two reasons. First, they do not “seem to lead to the 
knowledge of divine truths.’25 Second, both of these areas operate with 
crucial terminology that has roots in Greek philosophical discussion and, 
23) Thid..15. 
24 Tbid., 16. “Modes of signifying” = “modi significandi.” Valla is referring to philosophers 
of the thirteenth and fourteenth century who studied the specialized ways that different 
words acquired meaning in propositions and sentences. Martin of Dacia and Boethius of 
Dacia are most commonly named when studying this tendency, though they profited from 
the earlier work of twelfth-century “speculative grammarians” like William of Conches 
(the term “speculative grammarians” is often used to refer to both groups). See Costantino 
Marmo, Semiotica e linguaggio nella scolastica: Parigi, Bologna, Erfurt, 1270-1330 (Roma: 
Istituto Storico Italiano per il Medio Evo, 1994); Jan Pinborg, “Speculative Grammar,” in 
The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, ed. Norman Kretzmann, Anthony 
Kenny, and Jan Pinborg (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 254-69; idem, Die 
Entwicklung der Sprachtheorie im Mittelalter (Miinster: Aschendorff, 1967); and Irene 
Rosier, La grammaire spéculative des Modistes (Lille: Presse universitaires de Lille, 1983). 
25 Valla, Encomium of Saint Thomas (tr. Baker), 18. 


[PDF page 30]
10 CHRISTOPHER S. CELENZA 
ultimately, in the Greek language. Even if latterly coined Latin words exist 
to reflect certain Greek concepts (concepts around which much discus- 
sion in metaphysics and dialectic revolve, such as the ten categories of 
Aristotle), they are not organic to the Latin language and thus not organic 
to the kind of thinking and writing about religion that the Church Fathers 
prized. The Latin Fathers “dreaded words which the great Latin authors ... 
never used.”26 Once again one observes that uncontaminated Latin, 
meaningful Christianity, and human culture are linked for Valla, a presup- 
position he takes with him into his evaluation of the Fathers and their 
exemplary value. 
The Fathers mentioned are so important that Valla uses them to end his 
oration, arguing that, to understand Aquinas, if he is indeed to be consid- 
ered as having the kind of status that a Father should have, he must be 
paired with a Greek Father, the way one might pair the older Latin Fathers 
with Greek counterparts. And after suggesting that Aquinas should be 
considered above a series of medieval theologians (St. Bernard, Peter 
Lombard, Gratian, and Albert the Great, among others), this is precisely 
what Valla does. Ambrose is paired with Basil, Jerome with Gregory 
Nazianzen, Augustine with John Chrysostom, Gregory the Great with (for 
us pseudo) Dionysius the Areopagite, and Aquinas with John Damascene. 
Though Valla does not expatiate on these pairings beyond a few words 
each, there is a rationale to them. Ambrose considered himself a “rival” to 
Basil; Jerome claimed to have been a “pupil and disciple” of Nazianzen; 
Augustine “often followed” and “emulated” John Chrysostom; and Gregory 
the Great (Pope from 490-504) is the first to have mentioned Dionysius 
the Areopagite (Valla mentions that Gregory “is the first of the Latins ... to 
mention” Dionysius and notes that Dionysius was unknown to the Greeks 
as well).2” As for Aquinas and John Damascene, Valla writes that their 
pairing is justified, because “John wrote many logical and well-nigh meta- 
physical works.’28 
All things considered, one observes a restrained and balanced Valla. Yet 
Valla adds what could be read as another note of ambiguity. Sacred writers 
26 Tbid., 19. 
2” For Valla’s part in the story of the interpretation of ps.-Dionysius the Areopagite, see 
John Monfasani, “Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite in mid-Quattrocento Rome,” in 
Supplementum Festivum: Studies in Honor of Paul Oskar Kristeller, ed. James Hankins, John 
Monfasani, and Frederick Purnell, Jr. (Binghamton: MRTS, 1987), 189-219, reprinted with 
the same pagination as essay IX in John Monfasani, Language and Learning in Renaissance 
Italy (Aldershot: Ashgate, 1994). 
28 Valla, Encomium of Saint Thomas (tr. Baker), 23. 


[PDF page 31]
INTRODUCTION: SALVATORE CAMPOREALE AND LORENZO VALLA bt 
“always make music in the sight of God,’ and each pair has its part to play 
in the musical group Valla outlines: “The first pair is Basil and Ambrose, 
playing the lyre; the second, Nazianzen and Jerome, playing the cithara; 
the third, Chrysostom and Augustine, playing the psaltery; the fourth, 
Dionysius and Gregory, playing the flute ...” The fifth? ‘John Damascene 
and Thomas, playing the cymbals,’ which are, Valla says, an “instrument 
emitting happy, cheerful, and pleasing music.’29 What sort of praise is 
this? “Happy,” “cheerful,” and “pleasing” are positive attributes. But do 
they imply the requisite gravity, holiness, and depth due on the occasion 
of Thomas's feast day? Valla does not address these questions and closes 
his oration piously. 
These and other moments in Valla’s oeuvre demand interpretation, and 
there was no finer interpreter of Valla than Salvatore Camporeale. To 
understand Camporeale’s scholarship, two aspects come to the fore: 
Camporeale’s work with his mentor, Eugenio Garin, and his attention to 
language. Eugenio Garin (1909-2004), twentieth-century Italy’s leading 
historian of Italian philosophy, had a powerful imprint on the many schol- 
ars who studied with him.%° After a period teaching in Italian secondary 
schools Garin was Professor at the University of Florence from 1949 onward, 
and then from 1974-84 at the Scuola normale superiore di Pisa, Italy’s equiv- 
alent to France’s Ecole normale. Garin was also a generous correspondent 
and, both through his letters and through his tenure as President of Italy’s 
National Institute for the Study of the Renaissance (1980-88), advised a 
wide array of “informal” students. Camporeale was proud to have had 
Garin as his mentor for his “laurea” (then Italy’s highest academic degree), 
and it was Garin who encouraged Camporeale to publish his thesis, even 
writing a preface to Camporeale’s Lorenzo Valla: Umanesimo e teologia.*! 
Garin believed that the Italian Renaissance gave birth to a distinct type 
of philosophy, rooted in detailed attention to history, that had not been 
given its due in the historiography of philosophy.*? Heir to the work of 
29 Tbid., 24. 
30 On Garin, see Michele Ciliberto, Eugenio Garin: Un intellettuale nel Novecento (Roma: 
Laterza, 201); Rocco Rubini, “The Last Italian Philosopher: Eugenio Garin (with an 
Appendix of Documents),” Intellectual History Review 21 (2011), 209-230; Luciano Mecacci, 
“Contributo alla bibliografia degli scritti su Eugenio Garin,’ I/ Protagora 38 (2011), 519-526; 
Christopher S. Celenza, The Lost Italian Renaissance: Humanists, Historians, and Latin’s 
Legacy (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004), 16-57; and Garin’s autobiograph- 
ical statement in Eugenio Garin, La filosofia come sapere storico (Roma: Laterza, 1990). 
31 (Firenze: Istituto nazionale di studi sul Rinascimento, 1972). 
32 See Eugenio Garin, History of Italian Philosophy, ed. and tr. Giorgio Pinton, 2 vols. 
(Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2008). 


[PDF page 32]
i2 CHRISTOPHER S. CELENZA 
Italy’s two leading early twentieth-century philosophers, Giovanni Gentile 
and Benedetto Croce, Garin took their original insight that there was a 
large gap in the historiography of philosophy and, in the 1920s and 1930s, 
began doing detailed investigations into sources. These manifested them- 
selves in Garin’s early editions of and studies on the work of Pico della 
Mirandola. Garin went on to write copiously on numerous topics in the 
history of philosophy with a particular emphasis on Italian humanism. 
For Garin, “amanesimo” represented both a chronological designation 
(covering Italy’s late fourteenth and fifteenth centuries) but also a way of 
looking at the world that was tied not to metaphysical abstraction but 
rather to the place of human beings in the flow of historical events.*? As 
such it was a variety of philosophy and deserved to be studied with the 
same level of seriousness and engagement that the more traditional histo- 
riography of philosophy had commanded. 
Garin believed one of the Italian humanists’ key contributions to have 
been a different attitude toward authorities, one that manifested itself 
first and foremost in the need to situate the ancient authority in question 
in a proper historical context, to have shown that “the logic of Aristotle is 
not the word of God, but a product of history.’34 By extension, this histori- 
cizing also meant that philosophy, the search for wisdom, could not give 
timeless answers to the most important questions (those related to human 
conduct), but rather had itself to be continually renewed and re-examined 
without (what could be seen as) the straitjacket of metaphysics. Campo- 
reale inherited from Garin, and indeed tenaciously defended, this notion 
regarding Renaissance humanism’s importance and core message. For 
Camporeale, this appreciation manifested itself in a life-long passion for 
the work of Lorenzo Valla, whom Camporeale believed exemplified all 
that was most important about Italian humanism, especially when that 
movement was viewed along the lines that Garin had outlined. 
33 The fullest statement of these views can be found in Eugenio Garin, L’wmanesimo 
italiano: filosofia e vita civile nel Rinascimento (Bari: Laterza, 1957), which originally 
appeared in German as Der italienische Humanismus (Bern: Francke, 1947) at the behest of 
Emesto Grassi; there is an English translation by Peter Munz: Italian Humanism: Philosophy 
and Civic Life in the Renaissance (Oxford: Blackwell, 1965). See Ciliberto, Eugenio Garin, 
3-4; Rocco Rubini, “Humanism as Philosophia (Perennis): Grassi’s Platonic rhetoric 
between Gadamer and Kristeller,” Philosophy and Rhetoric 42 (2009), 242-78; idem, 
“Philology as Philosophy: the Sources of Ernesto Grassi’s Postmodern Humanism,” in 
Humanisms, Posthumanisms, and Neohumanisms, a special issue of Annali ditalianistica 26 
(2008), 223-48; Celenza, Lost Italian Renaissance, 30-36; and Stéphane Toussaint, 
Humanismes / Antihumanismes: De Ficin 4 Heidegger (Paris: Belles Lettres, 2008). 
34 Garin, Italian Humanism (tr. Munz), 4. 


[PDF page 33]
INTRODUCTION: SALVATORE CAMPOREALE AND LORENZO VALLA 13 
Camporeale’s attention to language predominates in his scholarship, 
for he prized it in Valla and cultivated it in his own work. On the one hand, 
there is no denying that Camporeale can be a dense and at times difficult 
writer. He presumes specialized knowledge on the part of the reader, and 
his prose can sometimes seem a commentary on a text, assuming that the 
reader has before him or her the text under discussion. Yet it is worth the 
trouble to follow him in his detailed and incisive readings, because one 
finds there a laboratory for the kind of philological analysis that yields 
important insights. 
Readers will notice an extensive use of what Camporeale often terms 
“antinomies,” by which he means mutually opposed, even mutually exclu- 
sive, ideas, each of which exerts a powerful sway. For instance, in his treat- 
ment of Valla’s treatise on the Donation of Constantine, readers will 
encounter Camporeale’s use of the antinomy imperium/evangelium. 
Imperium (“empire”) denotes the institutional drive toward power, con- 
trolled and from the top. Evangelium (“the good news” or “gospel”), on the 
contrary, reflects the notional core message of Christianity. More broadly, 
it connotes the values that Valla, in Camporeale’s view, assigned to the 
pre-Constantinian “Church,” or ecclesia, where the institution and its prac- 
tices reflected the original meaning of that word in Greek: “assembly.” 
For Camporeale, this antinomy serves a twofold purpose: first, it allows 
him to identify a form of criticism present in Valla’s work, whereby Valla 
can be read as using this binary opposition as a critical instrument; 
Camporeale reads Valla reading the document, as it were. Second, it serves 
as an instrument for Camporeale himself. Camporeale’s position is that 
Valla saw and acted on this and other irreconcilable oppositions that he 
saw embedded in the Constitutum Constantini and hence in the very 
idea of the Donation of Constantine as such. The crucial opposition, then, 
existed between a religion that was turning away from its evangelical, 
believer-centered mission towards an imperial identity, and an empire 
that voluntarily ceded power to the very entity it was supposed to protect 
and foster: the “assembly” of believers. In Valla’s view (or in Camporeale’s 
reading thereof), the Church’s imperial turn had actually occurred in a 
post-Constantinian context and needed critical examination in his own 
day; the empire’s ceding its prerogatives quite simply could not have 
occurred, given the workings of power. It was a fiction and thus could not 
and should not be used by the Church as the basis for any claims on secu- 
lar power. 
This example from Valla’s treatise on the Donation of Constantine is 
one among many in which Camporeale’s concern for precise analysis of 


[PDF page 34]
14 CHRISTOPHER S. CELENZA 
language comes to the fore; it also highlights another of Camporeale’s 
overriding preoccupations in his study of Valla. It is noteworthy that 
Camporeale, a Dominican, was also influenced by Marxism. Early in his 
career, he championed “liberation theology,” often in the pages of the 
journal Vita sociale, which he had a hand in editing. When it comes to his 
scholarship on Valla, however, Camporeale’s Marxism can be observed 
less in the kind of teleological political historiography that had such 
an influence on the study of the French Revolution, to give one example 
(one thinks of the work of Albert Soboul).3> Instead, one sees a focus on 
issues of power, as Camporeale consistently highlights the various times 
that Valla brings into relief the institutional politics of the Church. One 
might also emphasize that his “antinomies” amount to what can also be 
called dialectical oppositions, which bear a superficial resemblance to the 
classic cycle of “thesis/antithesis/synthesis,” itself loosely associated with 
Hegel and then with Marxist historiography.°° 
Yet, Camporeale was no starry-eyed utopian, rigid ideologue, or, 
most importantly, anti-religious polemicist. If his Marxism was mani- 
fest in his work, it arose not in the form of grand narratives. Rather 
one observes a concern for institutional power, inflected perhaps by the 
twentieth-century Italian intellectual Antonio Gramsci and his theories 
of hegemony, whereby the ideology of a ruling class becomes accepted 
as normative by those who are subject to rule.3” One sees, in addition, a 
merging of Camporeale’s interests with Valla’s, a sense that there was — 
or should have been — “revolution” in the air: if only the glaring contra- 
dictions of institutional hegemony were revealed, great change would 
arise — change whose direction one could not predict in the moment but 
whose outlines would become clearer with hindsight. In some respects, 
this notion was not far from wrong. 
As readers will observe, Camporeale discusses Valla in relation to 
Martin Luther and the Protestant Reformation toward the end of the essay 
3° See e.g., Albert Soboul, A Short History of the French Revolution, 1789-1799, tr. Geoffrey 
Symcox (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977); and for the most trenchant critique 
of this approach, Frangois Furet, Interpreting the French Revolution, tr. Elborg Forster 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981). 
36 For a general account of Marxist historiography, with bibliography, see Matt Perry, 
Marxism and History (New York: Palgrave, 2002). 
3” This theory ran throughout Gramsci’s prison notebooks, which enjoyed wide circula- 
tion among many who came of age in Camporeale’s generation; see Antonio Gramsci, 
Quaderni del carcere, ed. Valentino Gerratana, 4 vols. (Torino: Einaudi, 1975); see also his II 
materialismo storico e la filosofia di Benedetto Croce (Torino: Einaudi, 1966); and Thomas 
R. Bates, “Gramsci and the Theory of Hegemony,’ Journal of the History of Ideas 36 (1975), 
351-66. 


[PDF page 35]
INTRODUCTION: SALVATORE CAMPOREALE AND LORENZO VALLA 15 
on Valla’s Encomium. Camporeale stops well short of saying that Valla’s 
goals were Luther's, yet one notices a sense of tantalizing possibility, as if 
a genie were being let out of a bottle. The idea that Valla was implicitly 
propounding a “new ecclesiology” also recurs frequently in Camporeale’s 
work; and while it is certainly true that Valla’s vision of the Church in his 
day included dissatisfaction, it must be said that it is easier to discern 
moments when Valla is critiquing the Church, rather than explicitly out- 
lining a positive program for reform. Yet there is no denying that Luther 
knew and admired Valla’s work, at least in part.3* 
To conclude, Camporeale left behind challenging work that deserves 
attention, reflection, and debate. It is hoped that presenting two of 
Camporeale’s most astute studies in English will allow a broader group of 
scholarly readers interested in Lorenzo Valla to have access to Camporeale’s 
fertile and interesting scholarship. 
38 For one example of Luther on Valla (after reading Valla’s treatise on the Donation of 
Constantine), see Martin Luther, Martin Luthers Werke. Kritische Gesamtausgabe, part 4: 
Briefwechsel, vol. 2, ed. J. Ficker (Weimar: H. Bohlaus Nachfolger, 1931), 28. 


[PDF page 36]
3 lds ORO Oey ane OMIA An MOTT UOSTHL 
aati, poi ly eye taraudcle. {soy e210 f inttabi pnenibs. bona rio pail a 
PS enti) psary anrzst Garet be couse Dyolk ut nite tay in taltenPeaine aoe 
eater ara bide irae ld we feo! ory tbe bodutyy teal putsah pBimad dng: = 
Palen ttt wes tierariaw sth ‘siuea ry Renate roti, parparatcahed 
eet eh Tua ahd den td ead Silt oe ad a echoes chinks © 
Sneha tern tha itae fi cod sent us botencetie eb obing 
Aboot ten wide cavities Poitthyst dipicbe gt oi codaiw breeds 
satiiideterionn) orsheoetin ctatte al utiles 38 came gesgioulsteeq-nggipll 
: : * Suey Satsiak Peete Ghent ies peel 
exw pasts dove getters d henttineh aH dabei pean Thy bebveny ties. 
he ctrl ee its nssern tue! Sree Seer ed ath 8 chet bpd ttt 1 ee tea eee 
inter lcacrnthas soe Ube atalenendoit omnsiu teeta eigen 
fran eran eg yan mara recta cence lesen “Z 
it, GH eae! ante vebatt gat rasta eh 
; tuned hd eget > 
‘ «rye open ried ideotoge on, 
Pow ‘hus sweereicie: if iy Mardin war oer 
: - , os ‘in See of crand narratives Rather. 
Ca ¢ << © bpegt } met, i af i } perhaps by dhe 
ee Ty ra ‘om ut , } apnea Sl UiTies 1 aT if his cheartae 
é& oe ' ‘ ve bl ‘ s milling claw becomes ac wet! o 
(ena - * DOT PHA Ort euietOnae ie, in atuliien .. 
a a ‘ paw | e with Vollws © sete. Uwe phere was ~~ 
: aA Gu n@-“yowolitiany" 4, a rif only the glaring Conia 
arp « @ Creal Gages wee cereale peat change woukd @ 
Speedy at ao Oe Cav pot pterlict ih the omental 
» 2 ; as “ we Sharer wilh hinstsigh: in some respects, 
22 nS # s wee Hix. : : 
» Ouvy wh oes trail Sucenes Valle it relation w 
« r-P 4 athe , - ‘ow coe ws Ve f, i iAAiiet 2 | the ern ‘ f the cusery- 
a eee 
os * wv 4 a =r ; an aw fe A, TT mon, | i ; Challange ; 
Sega s Pee lenny 4 “ald ‘ere den aiden wij e Rs yorw yes: Serge arilieeees » —we Olan oF FD wp Formate 
- et tee 6 wey > 7 
9 99 ae wer? Use Wiemajhty, lal liviicgoahs, age Mats Seam ao. as h - Bs (~=-£ eerav i wie | ‘ 
ar Sy hci ey ine @ Pores 1h hae hich eajuyed wit ion de® Mirde. gee -i @: im Canora geprring Saw Arzemdty rare = P . v 
“a 
a My Sata hey oe? ten | aac, “ile (ees Mywakdl, ays bweewh 
cs cael webb « diay earned 
teitand 


[PDF page 37]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE: 
RHETORIC, FREEDOM, AND ECCLESIOLOGY 
IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY 
Salvatore I. Camporeale 
(translated by Patrick Baker) 
“No one will ever get to the very bottom of Valla’s arguments, 
which were most certainly not ignorant, without first grasping 
canon law and arriving at a true understanding of theology.” 
— Felino Sandei! 
In 1433 Lorenzo Valla presented his De voluptate (On Pleasure) to promi- 
nent members of the humanist circle in Florence: Leonardo Bruni, Carlo 
Marsuppini, and Ambrogio Traversari. From these three readers he knew 
to expect a rather critical response, or at least one not without reserva- 
tions. Nevertheless, his respect for the Florentine humanists and for their 
special competence in both Greek and Latin literature moved Valla to 
offer up his De voluptate to their reading and judgment. 
Contrary to what would be said of him later, and above all in the wake 
of Poggio Bracciolini’s invectives against him, Valla always submitted his 
own writings, especially the most demanding, to the judgment of those he 
esteemed and admired. He had already done so with his first essay, De 
comparatione Ciceronis Quintilianique (A Comparison of Cicero and 
Quintilian). This he sent by way of his friend Antonio Beccadelli to 
Marsuppini, whom he (Valla) considered the greatest connoisseur of the 
classical tradition among all his contemporaries. 
In the specific case of De voluptate, Valla nurtured the desire for a posi- 
tive, even if critical, reaction from the Florentines. With this his most 
demanding work since the Comparatio, he even hoped for the affirmation 
1 Wolfram Setz, Lorenzo Vallas Schrift gegen die Konstantinische Schenkung, De falsa 
credita et ementita Constantini donatione: Zur Interpretation und Wirkungsgeschichte. 
(Tiibingen: M. Niemeyer, 1975), 123: “Rationes autem, quibus Valla non certe omnino 
indocte motus est, ... nemo unquam medulitus evacuabit, nisi pontificium ius et veram 
theologie cognitionem adeptus fuerit.’ 


[PDF page 38]
i8 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
of the humanists of the Roman curia, and in particular of Bracciolini. 
What he got instead was heavy criticism from Poggio, who, to Guarino 
Veronese (and others), denounced both the Comparatio — for its anti-Cice- 
ronianism — and De voluptate — for its fully elaborated anti-Stoicism and 
neo-Epicureanism. Poggio was the first of all his contemporaries to per- 
ceive the young Valla’s originality and “arrogance” toward authority and 
tradition, as he (Poggio) wrote to Guarino and was wont to repeat 
thereafter.” 
The letters that Bruni and Marsuppini wrote to Valla in response to 
his De voluptate are well known, although they have perhaps not yet 
been adequately analyzed. Traversari’s response is also known, but it 
will be worth our while to recapitulate its salient aspects here. The 
Camaldolese monk admits first that he is incapable, at least for the pres- 
ent, of giving a considered response to the theses argued in De voluptate; 
his many duties have permitted him only a hasty reading. Nevertheless, 
he does not neglect to make known (and with a certain insistence, it 
must be added) his personal approval for the freedom with which Valla, 
in imitation of the ancients, criticized the classical ethics of the philoso- 
phers and elaborated new ideas. Traversari concludes his letter to Valla 
thus: 
Everyone is free to defend and steadfastly argue his own opinions; there 
is nothing inappropriate in coming to conclusions contrary to the judg- 
ments of the philosophers, as long as we defend them with worthy and true 
arguments.? 
Now, it is undoubtedly true that Traversari was busy with activities that 
denied him the leisure to discuss in detail Valla’s ethics of the Good (sum- 
mum bonum) as pleasure (voluptas). Nevertheless, one has the impression 
2 Lorenzo Valla, Epistole. Ed. Ottavio Besomi and Mariangela Regoliosi (Padova: 
Antenore, 1984), 125f., 215f. Poggio Bracciolini, Lettere. Ed. Helene Harth. 3 vols. (Firenze: 
Olschki, 1984-1987), 2:178ff:: it is the first letter (to Guarino Veronese, Roma 17 October 
1433) in which Bracciolini sets forth in strongly polemical terms his critique of Valla and his 
early writings (denouncing his “loquendi arrogantia,” 178.9); in fact, the letter contains in 
nuce what Poggio will explain more fully, both in form and in content, in his Orationes in 
L. Vallam, at the height of his controversy in the 1450s with Valla and his “school.” 
Cfr. Salvatore I. Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia (Firenze: Istituto nazio- 
nale di studi sul Rinascimento, 1972), passim and especially 31-146; idem, “Poggio Bracciolini 
contro Valla. Le Orationes in L. Vallam,’ in Poggio Bracciolini: 1380-1980: nel VI centenario 
della nascita (Firenze: Sansoni, 1982), 137-161. 
3 The text of Traversari’s letter to Valla is in Luciano Barozzi and Remigio Sabbadini, Studi 
sul Panormita e sul Valla (Firenze: Le Monnier, 1891), 64ff.: “Liberum [est] semper cuique et 
tueri et constanter asserere opiniones suas; non itaque improbo si quid contra philosopho- 
rum sentiamus inventa, si modo nostra probabilibus verisque rationibus muniamus.” 


[PDF page 39]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 19 
that he uses these extraneous duties as an excuse to hide some kind of 
uncertainty, or at least to suspend his judgment of Valla’s specific propos- 
als. He had to have read De voluptate with great attention to have so fully 
understood its roots, or better, its fundamental premises. In this, the first 
of the young humanist’s major works and among his most important theo- 
retically, these premises distinguish themselves in two ways. First, they 
display a critical originality — with respect to both method and content — 
in the face of classical philosophy and contemporary scholasticism. 
Second, Valla’s critical originality consists in an attitude of radical free- 
dom in rethinking the past and in reflecting on contemporary ethics. All 
this, let us repeat, was not only a question of method, but also, and above 
all, of content. At stake were the essential theses of De voluptate. 
1. INTRODUCTION TO A REINTERPRETATION OF THE DE FALSO CREDITA 
DONATIONE 
I have referred to Traversari’s epistolary response (and its pertinent con- 
text) to De voluptate because it suggests interpretive keys for understand- 
ing Valla’s famous Oration on the Falsely Believed and Forged Donation of 
Constantine (De falso credita et ementita Constantini donatione). The criti- 
cal originality and radical freedom that Traversari identified in Valla’s 
early dialogue will allow us to penetrate Valla’s later oration against the 
Constitutum Constantini.4 
In this essay we shall proceed in the following manner. As a prelude we 
shall first enunciate in three points the fundamental themes that consti- 
tute the fabric of the Oration. Then we shall sketch a cultural outline of 
4 [The Constitutum Constantini is the legal privilege supposedly stipulating the Emperor 
Constantine’s grant of the Western Empire to Pope Sylvester I, ie. the document com- 
monly known as the Donation of Constantine. Eds. | 
The reinterpretation of Valla’s Oration proposed in this essay assumes familiarity with 
the following fundamental works: Setz, Lorenzo Vallas Schrift; and Setz’s critical edition of 
the Oration: Lorenzo Valla, De falso credita et ementita Constantini donatione, ed. Wolfram 
Setz (Weimar: Bohlau, 1976) (hereafter cited as Valla, De falso, page and line number [with 
the corresponding paragraph numbers of the edition and English translation in the I Tatti 
Renaissance Library in parentheses: Lorenzo Valla, On the Donation of Constantine, tr. 
G.W. Bowersock (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2007); all English transla- 
tions of the Oration are Bowersock’s]), together with Valla, Epistole, 176, n. 2; also important 
are Vincenzo De Caprio, “Retorica e ideologia nella Declamatio di Lorenzo Valla sulla 
donazione di Costantino,’ Paragone-Letteratura 29, n. 338 (1978): 36-56; Riccardo Fubini, 
“Papato e storiografia nel Quattrocento. Storia, biografia e propaganda in un recente stu- 
dio,” Studi medievali, II s., 18, fasc. I (1977): 321-351; Joachim W. Stieber, Pope Eugenius IV, the 
Council of Basel, and the Secular and Ecclesiastical Authorities in the Empire. The Conflict 
over Supreme Authority and Power in the Church (Leiden: Brill, 1978). 


[PDF page 40]
20 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Valla the humanist, from both a theoretical and a biographical point of 
view, with the intention of identifying the immediate and decisive context 
from which his treatment of the Constitutum emerged. In this way we 
hope to provide an introduction that will equip the reader to grasp the 
detailed and intricate analysis of Valla’s Oration that follows. 
First: with his Oration on the Constitutum Valla elaborates an alterna- 
tive to the medieval and scholastic ecclesiology of the “Constantinian 
Church.” Valla’s ecclesiology follows specifically and directly from the 
christiana libertas (Christian freedom) of the New Testament and is 
invested, by analogy, with the political semantics of the classical 
(Athenian) ecclesia.5 The foundation of Valla’s new ecclesiology is 
Christian freedom, understood in the Pauline sense as a specific dimen- 
sion of the christianus homo (Christian man) and deriving from the dic- 
tates of the Gospel and the advent of saving grace. His discourse on the 
Christian church has an extra-theological — but nonetheless fundamental — 
element: the civil and strictly human community (civitas), i.e. the com- 
munity as founded on political liberty (polis). It is in fact the polis, the 
politically free community, that is specific and peculiar to man as such, 
whom Valla defines as an animal liberum (free animal). 
According to Valla, this notion of civil community and political freedom 
achieved its greatest historical actualization in the respublica romana 
(Roman republic) and in romana libertas (Roman freedom). Both were set 
in motion, or better, were founded and instituted, by the senatus popu- 
lusque romanus (the Senate and the People of Rome). At first Valla merely 
outlines this ethico-political perspective, namely the conceptions of man 
as an animal liberum and of the Roman civitas. He then deepens his analysis 
through historical critique, first with regard to communities and peoples 
that subjected others and deprived them of freedom, and then considering 
communities who of their own will submitted themselves to the authority 
or servitude of an absolute power. One such absolute power was the empire 
established by Caesar and the Augustan emperors. Valla repeatedly affirms 
that these emperors were the usurpers of the respublica, i.e., of the freedom 
and powers of the Senate and the People of Rome. Eventually, Constantine 
the Great would embody that imperial power when absolutism had 
achieved its apex in the history of the Roman republic. 
In summary, the chain of reasoning of Valla’s ecclesiological discourse 
seems to develop along the lines of various aspects of freedom: from the 
freedom of man as such — the animal liberum — to the freedom of man as 
5 [Le., the assembly of free citizens. Eds. | 


[PDF page 41]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 21 
redeemed by saving grace — christianus homo — both of which are deter- 
mined by the freedom of man as an essentially political animal. Freedom, 
although it is a specific property of human nature, can necessarily only 
achieve actualization in the civitas or polis. This is Valla’s romana libertas. 
Both natural and civil liberty receive their fullest explication and actual- 
ization within the sphere of the evangelical® ecclesia and according to its 
economics of salvation (“in the age of grace”), and together they constitute 
for Valla christiana libertas. Therefore, if the community of believers 
should ever cease to be the home of Christian freedom, the ecclesia would 
find itself in antithesis with the message of the Gospel. More precisely, it 
would constitute a negation of both civil and natural freedom, both of 
which pertain to the (defining) essence of man.” 
Second: Valla’s reflection on the Constitutum Constantini is at once his- 
torical and philological. Consequently he chose for the method and con- 
tent of its written form, in accordance with his humanist conception of the 
art of rhetoric, the literary genre of the oration. With this argumentative 
method Valla attempts to identify contradictions in scholastic, ecclesio- 
logical, and political language as well as juridical and theological antino- 
mies, all based on the language historically derived from the Constitutum. 
For the tradition of the “Constantinian Church” had in fact been founded 
on the pseudo-Constantinian Pagina Privilegii.§ The “Constantinian” eccle- 
siological tradition was elaborated in various ways, actualized by the 
Roman Church, theorized by theologians and canon lawyers, raised almost 
to the level of dogma by Innocent III and Boniface VIII, and was still being 
perpetuated in the time of Eugenius IV.° Therefore Valla’s rhetorical 
strategy — instead of being an apodictic demonstration or the proposal of 
a new ecclesiological and/or political theory — is an historical and philo- 
logical analysis that reduces the tradition to its ideological foundations. In 
this way Valla intends to demonstrate how the Constitutum Constantini, as 
well as the practices resulting from it and the very language of the Roman 
Church, are falsifiable by means of the internal contradictions found in the 
text itself and in its successive re-elaborations. 
6 [In the sense of deriving from the Evangelium, i.e., the Gospel. Eds. ] 
7 Valla, De falso, 147.16 (76), 162.10ff. (86), 163.17ff. (87), 65f. (9), 73-75 (17-18), 78.12, 
163-167 (87-89), with Setz’s notes and commentary. 
8 [The formal “Document of Privilege” supposedly authorizing the Donation of 
Constantine. Eds. ] 
9 Valla, De falso, gof. (33), 158f. (83), 160f. (84); cf. as well Setz, Lorenzo Vallas Schrift, 
18-24. 


[PDF page 42]
22 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
This method is no different — in fact it is exactly the same except for 
variations necessitated by the particular text under consideration — from 
that used by Valla in other works, for example: in the Adnotationes, in 
which he collated the Vulgate Bible with the “veritas graeca”!° of the New 
Testament; in the Repastinatio," in which he analyzed the basic terms of 
Aristotelian scholasticism (transcendentals, predicaments, and predica- 
bles) with the aim of showing that philosophical vocabulary to be non- 
sense; and in De voluptate, which subjected terms and categories such as 
bonum (good), virtus (virtue), and voluptas (pleasure) to a philological and 
anti-ideological investigation.” 
Third: the Oration on the Constitutum is a speech declaimed to the 
entire Christian community, i.e., the whole Church, understood to include 
both its religious and political components — “as if in an assembly of kings 
and princes,” writes Valla.!3 The orator demonstrates his awareness of the 
antinomies on which the Constantinian Church had been founded in the 
past and with which — or better, on account of which — it survives into his 
own time. With such a demonstration — really a denunciation — Valla pro- 
poses to bring the Church, both its head and its members, to this very 
10 [Literally “the Greek truth,” i.e., the original Greek text. In the Adnotationes in Novum 
Testamentum (Annotations on the New Testament) Valla compared the Latin of the Vulgate 
with the Greek found in the manuscripts at his disposal in order to show problems in the 
traditionally accepted text and thus to arrive at a more “truthful” understanding of the New 
Testament, i.e. one based on a more solid philological foundation. Eds. | 
Nl [Repastinatio dialecticae et philosophiae (The Rentrenching of Dialectic and 
Philosophy). The work was revised by Valla several times and subsequently became known 
under the title Dialecticae disputationes (Dialectical Disputations). Eds. | 
2 For an overall look at Valla’s “method” both in theory and in practice, see Camporeale, 
Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 31-208; idem, “Lorenzo Valla tra Medioevo e 
Rinascimento. Encomion s. Thomae — 1457,’ Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 7 (1976): 1-194 
(reprinted in idem, Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma. Studi e testi [Roma: Edizioni di 
Storia e Letteratura, 2002], 121-330, and translated in the present volume, 145-296); idem, 
“Lorenzo Valla. Repastinatio, liber primus: retorica e linguaggio,”’ in Lorenzo Valla e 
lumanesimo italiano. Atti del Convegno internazionale di studi umanistici (Parma, 18-19 otto- 
bre 1984), ed. Ottavio Besomi and Mariangela Regoliosi (Padova: Antenore, 1986), 217-239 
(along with other important contributions in the same volume concerning the relation- 
ship between philology and methodology in Valla). More recent studies include: Maristella 
De Panizza Lorch, A Defense of Life: Lorenzo Valla’s Theory of Pleasure (Miinchen: Fink, 
1985); Brian Vickers, “Valla’s Ambivalent Praise of Pleasure: Rhetoric in the Service of 
Christianity,” Viator 17 (1986): 271-319; Riccardo Fubini, “Richerche sul De voluptate di 
Lorenzo Valla,” Medioevo e Rinascimento 1 (1987): 189-239; Lorenzo Valla, De professione 
religiosorum, ed. Mariarosa Cortesi (Padova: Antenore, 1986) (in addition to the critical 
edition itself, Cortesi’s ample introduction and full and accurate commentary are funda- 
mental); Richard Waswo, Language and Meaning in the Renaissance (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1987), 88-113 and passim. 
8 Valla, De falso, 62.9 (6): “quasi in contione regum et principum.” 


[PDF page 43]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 23 
awareness for the purpose of overcoming the antinomies in question: “My 
intention is to eradicate error from people’s minds.”4 
Valla identifies three major historical and theological contradictions of 
the Roman Church (along with others in both the political and spiritual 
realms): imperium/evangelium (empire/Gospel), vicarius Christi/vicarius 
Caesaris (vicar of Christ/vicar of Caesar), and servitudo/libertas (slavery/ 
freedom). These contradictories, he believes, can be resolved through a 
renewal of evangelical freedom, which flows from saving grace, and of 
political freedom, which is demanded by our very nature inasmuch as 
“human beings are born for freedom.”!® 
Valla is aware, and he says so many times, that by proposing such 
solutions publicly he is exposing himself to charges of “recklessness and 
impiety.”© Nevertheless, and precisely because he is an orator and an 
imitator of the apostle Paul, Valla feels obliged to pit himself and his 
radical criticism against tradition: “I overturn the combined wisdom of 
the ancients with my works.”!” Valla’s procedure gives further evidence 
that the very rhetorical structure of the Oration is determined by its fun- 
damental theme (elaborated in the first point): freedom, which here 
must be understood specifically as “freedom of speech,” a concept which 
Valla borrows from Quintilian’s Institutio oratoria (The Orator’s 
Education). Indeed, we read in the first pages of the Oration: “no one who 
knows how to speak well can be considered a true orator unless he also 
dares to speak out.”'8 
So much for the fundamental themes of Valla’s Oration. Now we shall 
attempt to outline the intellectual and biographical context that deter- 
mined these themes and thus gave the Oration its shape. In the Repastinatio 
dialecticae et philosophiae (from the same period as the Oration), Valla 
insistently pursued his linguistic analysis as a semantic investigation. He 
was fully aware — and often says so — that by putting pressure, so to speak, 
on the vis verborum, or the “force (meaning) of words,” one could cause to 
emerge, as if by a self-revelation of the words themselves, what he calls the 
14 Tbid., 59.5f. (3): “id ago ... ut errorem a mentibus hominum convellam.” 
15 Tbid., 166.19 (89): “homines libertati natos’” [translation modified]. 
16 Tbid., 55.6ff. (1): “inasmuch as there are those who feel ill treated and accuse me of 
recklessness and impiety” (“cum sint, qui indigne ferant meque ut temerarium sacrile- 
gumque criminentur’). 
17 Ybid., 58.7ff. (2); idem, Epistole, 215.8ff.: “omnem veterum sapientiam meis operibus 
everto.” 
18 Valla, De falso, 57.1f. (1): “loquendi libertas”; 57.18ff. (2): “neque enim is verus est 
habendus orator qui bene scit dicere, nisi et dicere audeat’ (emphasis added) [translation 
modified]; Setz, Lorenzo Vallas Schrift, 48-51. 


[PDF page 44]
24 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
vis rerum, the “force (meaning) of things.” Therefore by exposing in his 
Oration the counterfeit gift to the Roman Church — the “patronage of fal- 
sity” and “embellished falsehood,’ the perverse “deception” that pollutes 
Christendom and its history — Valla attempts in every way possible to 
draw out and revivify original “Christian candor,’ i.e., the “sacrament of 
truth” of the Gospel and of the ancient, apostolic Church. Let us reflect on 
his words: “Dear Jesus, what force, what divinity there is in the truth, 
which, on its own, defends itself without great effort from all treachery 
and deceit.’2° 
The “force of truth” (vis veritatis). The inquiry into the Constitutum thus 
becomes an undertaking for the renewal of Christian freedom within the 
Church. It is in fact freedom — evangelical freedom, together with political 
and civil freedom, the freedom to disagree in speech and in writing while 
inquiring into truth — that is proclaimed in the Oration and that is held up 
as the ideal of contemporary Christianity. What is more, certain pages of 
Valla’s text reveal his religious and political vision to be the fundamental 
inspiration, the authentic motivation (theoretical and practical) for his 
Oration on the Constitutum Constantini. 
Without a doubt, the immediate context and the decisive circumstances 
of the Oration’s composition and diffusion are to be found in the political 
conflict between Alfonso of Aragon’s court in Naples and the Papacy of 
Eugenius IV (Gabriele Condulmer). Also important were the rifts in Valla’s 
own friendship with Eugenius, whose causes are to be found in the human- 
ist’s personal biography, in his open disagreement and conflict with Father 
Condulmer, and in his life-long intellectual development.”! 
Banned from papal Rome, Valla had to move continually for the next 
twenty years from north to south along the peninsula in search of a place 
to call home. Forced to depart from the familiar environment of the cul- 
tural and civic context of his birth, where he had been educated and 
intensely promoted, the humanist carried forth in his own person the 
19 Camporeale, “Lorenzo Valla. Repastinatio,’ 219. 
20 Valla, De falso, 148.6 (76): “patrocinium falsitas”; 10.2 (46): “adornare mendacium’; 
155.2 (81): “fallaciam’”; 148.5f. (76): “sinceritas christiana”; 66.21 (10): “sacramentum verita- 
tis”; 99.17-19 (39): “Bone Jesu, quanta vis, quanta divinitas est veritatis, que per sese sine 
magno conatu ab omnibus dolis ac fallaciis se ipsa defendit” [translation modified]. 
21 For Valla’s biographico-cultural development (beyond the citations in notes 4 and 
12), see Mario Fois, Il pensiero cristiano di Lorenzo Valla nel quadro storico-culturale del suo 
ambiente (Roma: Libreria editrice dell’Universita Gregoriana, 1969); and Mariangela 
Regoliosi’s chronological commentary in Valla, Epistole (with further and more recent con- 
tributions by Ottavio Besomi, Mariangela Regoliosi, and Martin Davies in Besomi and 
Regoliosi (eds.), Lorenzo Valla e 'umanesimo italiano, 77-109). 


[PDF page 45]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 25 
conflict between the Roman curia, papal government, and his status as 
a citizen of Rome. This conflict slowly intensified, and it expanded 
not only in the arena of Valla’s own intellectual work and the circle of the 
best-known curial humanists, but also in that of the dominant culture of 
scholasticism. His inquisitorial trial at the hands of the scholastics in 
Naples in the 1440s, and the polemics of Poggio Bracciolini and his sup- 
porters in the 1450s, ultimately constituted the furthest — and thus the 
most evident — extremes of this clash of opposed positions. 
This constant and forced wandering, this intellectual journey, this frus- 
trating relationship with Eugenius IV, for whom Valla would not only nur- 
ture a sense of friendship and esteem but to whom he would also direct 
(as did other humanists like Bruni and Flavio Biondo) his appeals for an 
effective promotion of the new cultural renaissance — all these form, it 
would seem, the biographical background and the rather personal ratio- 
nale, perhaps the true motivation, for Valla’s consideration of and dis- 
course on the Donation of Constantine.?? 
This is the source of Valla’s determination to investigate what he him- 
self calls “a matter of canon law and theology,” and he therefore directs his 
attack “against all canonists and theologians.’”2? Hence his exordium, 
which is dominated by that “I dissent” with which the Oration begins.”4 
This “dissent” is an ecclesiological awareness contrary to tradition and a 
manifest expression, within the very context of Christendom, of a new 
paradigm of criticism that is at once theological and political. It is differ- 
ent from the classic paradigm of “heresy,” which is a stance contrary to 
dogma.” In line with this dissent Valla rejects and denounces what he 
calls the “new tyranny of the Pope,” the “hypocrisy” (in the strong, original 
sense of the word) by which the “vicar of Christ” behaves as a despot in the 
persona of Caesar instead of acting in the persona of Christ. Such rule is 
characterized as “tyranny” because the Roman pope presents himself as 
the historical heir of the very “imperial” power which had violated the 
political and civil freedom of the Roman Republic. Now it reveals itself as 
22, Cf. Setz, Lorenzo Vallas Schrift, 59-75; and Eugenio Marino, “Eugenio IV e la storiogra- 
fia di Flavio Biondo,’ Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 4 (1973): 240-287. 
23 Valla, Epistole, 192f.: “res canonici iuris et theologie”; “contra omnes canonistas atque 
omnes theologos’; Setz, Lorenzo Vallas Schrift, 51-59. 
24 Valla, De falso, 55.6 (1): “dissentio” [translation modified]. 
25 Salvatore I. Camporeale, “Giovanmaria dei Tolosani O.P.: 1530-1546. Umanesimo, 
Riforma e teologia controversista,’ Memorie Domenicane, n.8., 17 (1986): 145-252, passim 
(reprinted in idem, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma, 331-461), on Valla 
and “heresy” as a stance contrary to tradition; John M. Headley, “The Reformation as Crisis 
in the Understanding of Tradition,’ Archiv fiir Reformationsgeschichte 78 (1987): 5-22. 


[PDF page 46]
26 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
a “new” tyranny, since the usurpation of evangelical freedom in the 
respublica christiana is linked to Caesar’s suppression of the respublica 
romana.”® 
Valla’s personal difficulties with Eugenius IV are bound up, as has been 
mentioned, with his call for the pope to take up his cause. The Oration on 
the Constitutum Constantini is aimed at Eugenius. So is a personal letter, in 
1434, and a public one as well, the Apologia of 1444.?” In the letter of 1434 
Valla had requested that the pope promote and give institutional support, 
outside the realm of the clergy, to the studies and cultural efforts of lay- 
men. In the Apologia of 1444, Valla asked, again in line with his theological 
heterodoxy, to be defended by the pope from the inquisition of scholastic 
theologians. Now, in the Oration, Eugenius IV is called in the name of 
Christendom to take up the task, as Bishop of Rome and successor to 
St. Peter, of effecting an historical break in the tradition of the “Con- 
stantinian Church’; he is called to revive both Christian evangelical free- 
dom and Roman civil and political freedom. This he should do before 
“someone decides to take up arms against the Roman papacy,’ a course of 
action which, for his part, Valla claims in no way to support. The perora- 
tion concluding Valla’s speech is an explicit plea to Eugenius IV to under- 
take this institutional change and ecclesiastical renewal. To be precise, the 
pope should definitively reject and abrogate the Constitutum Constantini, 
and he should historically mark his papacy with the “de-Constantiniza- 
tion” of the Roman Church.?8 
Everything said so far can be reduced to two final considerations that 
serve to further refine and deepen this reinterpretation of the Oration on 
the Constitutum. The first concerns Valla’s method of studying the 
Donation; the second regards the content, and more precisely the aim, of 
his work. 
As for the first consideration, Valla understands philological and his- 
torical analysis to be an argumentative procedure by means of which the 
26 Valla, De falso, 78.1-14 (21): “vicarius Christi”; 134f. (65): “hypocritam’; 166f. (89): 
“novam pape tyrannidem” [translation modified]. For the expression christiana respublica, 
cf. idem, Dialogue sur le libre-arbitre, ed. Jacques Chomarat (Paris: Vrin, 1983), 27.9. 
*7 Valla, Epistole, 145-149. The Apologia ad papam Eugenium IV (Apology to Pope 
Eugenius IV) is in idem, Scritti filosofici e religiosi, ed. Giorgio Radetti (Firenze: Sansoni, 
1953). See in particular Gianni Zippel, “La Defensio quaestionum in philosophia di L. Valla e 
un noto processo dell’'Inquisizione napoletana,’ Bullettino dell'Istituto Storico Italiano per il 
Medio Evo e Archivio Muratoriano 69 (1957): 319-347; idem, “L’autodifesa di Lorenzo Valla 
per il processo dell’Inquisizione napoletana (1444),” Italia medievale e umanistica 13 (1970): 
59-94. 28 Valla, De falso, 172-176. 


[PDF page 47]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 27 
truth or non-truth, the authenticity or inauthenticity, of a given thing can 
be proven simply by demonstrating the falsifiability of the specific lan- 
guage that expresses or intends to express that thing. In fact, in Valla’s use 
of the syntagma res-verba (things-words), the understanding or correla- 
tive evaluation of a res (thing) is provided by the verification or “falsifica- 
tion” of the verba (words) that have that res as a referent. But such a 
procedure is properly speaking a rhetorical mode of argument — in both 
Quintilian’s and Valla’s understanding of rhetoric, as described by 
Quintilian (Institutio oratoria, books II and III) and fully elaborated by 
Valla (Repastinatio, book 1) as the science (scientia/episteme) of lan- 
guage. In this sense rhetoric rises — first in Quintilian and then above all in 
Valla — to the level of a critical and interpretive discipline that consists in 
the philological and historical analysis of a specific language (logos/ 
sermo); it places particular emphasis on how that language signifies and 
makes references with respect to a distinct reality made up of “res, i.e., 
deeds, things that have been done (pragmata).”*9 
Consequently, Valla uses the rhetorical analysis of the Constitutum 
Constantini to establish the vis verborum of the text, in order then to arrive 
at an historical and definitive evaluation of the vis rerum from which that 
very text was derived and of which it became at the same time a transmit- 
ter. Continuing along these coordinates, Valla passes (inductively) from 
the analysis of an ideological document (the Constitutum) to the falsifica- 
tion of the “praxis” (praxis/actum) of which that document is supposed to 
be a theoretical foundation and historical manifestation (in this case, both 
politically and ecclesiastically). 
Therefore, Valla’s Oration must be understood within the coordinates 
vis verborum|vis rerum of this kind of inductive, rhetorical analysis. Only 
on the basis of this kind of interpretation can we understand the full 
meaning of what Valla wrote to Giovanni Aurispa with regard to the 
Oration: “I have written nothing more rhetorical.”3° 
As for the second consideration, specifically concerning the Oration’s 
proper and thematic subject, we should first of all stress what has already 
been mentioned about its content and purpose. Both, and thus the work’s 
central message, are to be identified in the novel political and religious 
29 Lorenzo Valla, Repastinatio dialectice et philosophie, ed. Gianni Zippel, 2 vols. 
(Padova, Antenore, 1982), 1:18.1-4: “res, idest pragmata’; Quintilian, Institutio oratoria, 
Il].6.28. Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 160f.; idem, “Lorenzo Valla. 
Repastinatio,” 233-237. 
30 Valla, Epistole, 249-252, at 252.9: “nihil magis oratorium scripsi” (cf. Valla’s letter to 
Guarino Veronese in ibid., 244ff.). Setz, Lorenzo Vallas Schrift, 46-51. 


[PDF page 48]
28 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
perspective that Valla intends to propose to Christendom, viewed against 
the background of his relationship with Eugenius IV and of his own com- 
plex ethical and intellectual experiences. This novel perspective emerges 
from the Oration as the reaffirmation of absolute political and Christian 
freedom, or better, as the will to human freedom according to the various 
levels and multiple dimensions that this same freedom assumes in Valla’s 
composition, the libertas that was indicated earlier as the humanist’s 
ideal. 
Finally, let us consider Valla’s letter to Cardinal Trevisan, written from 
Naples in 1444. Within the context of Valla’s personal life and intellectual 
work, the letter must be interpreted not only as the clear refusal to retract 
(even minimally) his Oration on the Constitutum Constantini, but also, and 
perhaps above all, as a testimony to the truest and most authentic motiva- 
tions and meanings of the work as a whole. As he expresses himself to 
Trevisan, Valla has spoken and written in the service of truth both to ben- 
efit the Christian faith and, not least, to reaffirm his role and value among 
his contemporaries as an engaged intellectual in the service of political 
and religious freedom: “Bear one thing in mind. I was not moved by hatred 
of the Pope but acted for the sake of the truth, of religion, and also of a 
certain renown -— to show that I alone knew what no one else knew.’3! 
2. CAUSA VERITATIS: FROM THE EXORDIUM TO THE PERORATION 
So far we have provided a general overview of the meaning and immedi- 
ate context of Valla’s Oration. Now follows an interpretation of the whole 
text according to the division of its arguments, which Valla himself explic- 
itly divided into discrete sections.°2 
31 Valla, Epistole, 246-248: “Hoc tantum consideres velim, non odio pape adductum, sed 
veritatis, sed religionis, sed cuiusdam etiam fame gratia motum, ut quod nemo sciret, id 
ego scisse solus viderer” (cf. ibid., 227ff.). For the term religio in Valla, see the index verbo- 
rum and Cortesi’s corresponding notes in idem, De professione religiosorum. 
32 Valla, De falso, 61f. (5) (emphasis added): “But before I come to refuting the Donation 
document, which is the sole authority those people have, something that is not only false 
but even rude, structure demands that I go back farther. First, I shall assert that Constantine 
and Sylvester were not such men as, with the former, to want to make a donation, to be in 
a legal position to do so, and to have in his power the ability to hand over these territories 
to someone else, and, with the latter, to want to receive them and be in a legal position to 
do so. Second, even if these points were other than absolutely true and very clear, I shall 
assert that the one did not accept and the other did not hand over the possession of the 
things that are said to have been donated, but that they remained forever under the juris- 
diction and authority of the Caesars. Third, I shall assert that nothing was given by 
Constantine to Sylvester, but rather to the previous pontiff before he received baptism, 


[PDF page 49]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 29 
Conceived as a procedure of rhetorical argumentation, Valla’s Oration 
begins (exordium) and ends (peroration) with assertions about the causa 
veritatis, or “cause of truth,” which he intends to investigate historically 
and defend theoretically.33 The investigation and defense of the “truth” 
have a double purpose in the Oration. First, they are to demonstrate the 
falseness of the Constitutum Constantini and make the papacy aware of 
that falseness. These are explicit assertions in the exordium. Second, they 
are to bring about the effective abrogation of the Constitutum on the 
part of the papacy and therewith the elimination of the theoretical and 
practical consequences deriving from the Constantinian ecclesiological 
tradition. These are the concluding affirmations of the peroration. The 
establishment of this double purpose allows us to connect the exordium 
directly to the peroration: the point of departure coincides with the point 
of arrival in the circular path of this rhetorical discourse. 
In the first pages of the Oration Valla writes: 
Many, many books have issued from my pen in almost every area of learn- 
ing, and in these ... I dissent from some great authors of long established 
and that these were modest gifts of places where the Pope could spend his life. Fourth, 
I shall assert that it is falsely claimed a copy of the Donation was found among the emper- 
or’s decrees or was extracted from the Story of Sylvester, because it is neither found in that 
story nor in any other, and because in it are contained various contradictions, impossibili- 
ties, stupidities, barbarisms, and absurdities. Furthermore I shall speak about donations of 
certain other emperors — whether fictitious or worthless — and there I shall add from abun- 
dant evidence that if Sylvester ever had taken possession, once he or some other pontiff had 
been deprived of it, after so great an interval of time it could not be recovered by any legal 
claim, human or divine. Lastly, I shall assert that the supreme pontiff’s current possessions 
could not, in the course of time, have been administered under his authority.” (“Verum ante- 
quam ad confutandam donationis paginam venio ... ordo postulat, ut altius repetam. 
Et primum dicam non tales fuisse Constantinum Silvestrumque: illum quidem, qui donare 
vellet, qui iure donare posset, qui, ut in manum alteri ea traderet, in sua haberet potestate; 
hunc autem, qui vellet accipere quique iure accepturus foret. Secundo loco: si hec non 
essent, que verissima atque clarissima sunt, neque hunc acceptasse neque illum tradidisse 
possessionem rerum, que dicuntur donate, sed eas semper in arbitrio et imperio Cesarum 
permansisse. Tertio: nihil datum Silvestro a Constantino, sed priori pontifici, antequam 
etiam baptismum acceperat, donaque illa mediocria fuisse, quibus papa degere vitam pos- 
set. Quarto: falso dici donationis exemplum aut apud decreta reperiri aut ex historia Silvestri 
esse sumptum, quod neque in illa neque ulla in historia invenitur, in eoque quedam con- 
traria, impossibilia, stulta, barbara, ridicula contineri. Preterea loquar de quorundam alio- 
rum Cesarum vel simulata vel frivola donatione, ubi ex abundanti adiiciam: si Silvester 
possedisset, tamen — sive illo sive quovis alio pontifice a possessione deiecto — post tantam 
temporis intercapedinem nec divino nec humano iure posse repeti. Postremo: ea, que a 
summo pontifice tenentur, nullius temporis longitudine potuisse prescribi.”) In the B manu- 
scripts, this section is glossed (at the first line) “Divisio” (i.e. “Plan of the work’): ibid., 61.30. 
33 On the expression “causa veritatis,” see Gregorio Tifernate’s letter to Valla regarding 
the Oration, in Setz, Lorenzo Vallas Schrift, 84. On the technical use of the term causa in the 
Oration, cf. Quintilian, Institutio oratoria: III.3.15; IIl.4.1ff,; 1116.27; I11.10.1—3; [1.11.53 IV.1.40. 


[PDF page 50]
30 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
reputation .... I know that for a long time people have been waiting to hear 
the accusation I would bring against the Roman pontiffs: a massive accusa- 
tion assuredly, of either supine ignorance or monstrous avarice, which is 
‘enslavement to idols’ [Eph. 5:5], or pride of rule, which is always accompa- 
nied by cruelty. Already for several centuries they either did not realize that 
Constantine’s Donation was a lie and a fabrication, or else they invented it 
themselves. Their descendants, following the deceitful path of earlier gen- 
erations, defended as true what they knew to be false — dishonoring the maj- 
esty of the pontificate, dishonoring the memory of the pontiffs of old, 
dishonoring the Christian religion .... For, as I shall show, that Donation, 
from which the supreme pontiffs want to derive their legal right, was 
unknown to Sylvester and Constantine alike.*4 
The dissent put forward in the Oration is aimed at the papacy and its 
authority in the realm of Christendom. More precisely, Valla’s criticism is 
directed against the historical ecclesiology surrounding the Roman 
papacy and the exercise of papal authority, as well as how both have been 
jointly theorized and put into practice on the foundation of the Donation 
of Constantine. 
The course of the argument proceeds as follows. The validity of a doc- 
trine, as well as of any political, juridical, or spiritual authority, depends 
on the (historically and/or theoretically verifiable) origin and premises to 
which it is reducible. But the Donation (“from which the supreme pontiffs 
want to derive their legal right”) is an historical and ideological forgery. 
Therefore the basis of Constantinian ecclesiology and the consequent his- 
torical development of the Roman papacy is invalid. In reality, both con- 
stitute a perverse heterogeneity of ends in the history of the papacy, the 
“vicariate of Christ,” and of the “Christian religion” (“dishonoring the 
Christian religion’). 
Again, by expressing the purpose of his dissent in these terms, Valla 
also affirms — and it is made quite explicit in the Oration — that tradition in 
itself alone can guarantee neither theological orthodoxy nor canonical 
34 Valla, De falso, 55.1ff/59.17—-60.10/60.20-—61.2 (1-4): “Plures a me libri compluresque 
emissi sunt in omni fere doctrinarum genere, in quibus ... a nonnullis magnisque et longo 
iam evo probatis auctoribus dissentio .... Scio iandudum expectare aures hominum, quod- 
nam pontificibus Romanis crimen impingam: profecto ingens sive supine ignorantie sive 
immanis avaritie, que est ‘idolorum servitus, sive imperandi vanitatis, cuius crudelitas 
semper est comes. Nam aliquot iam seculis aut non intellexerunt donationem Constantini 
commenticiam fictamque esse aut ipsi finxerunt sive posteriores in maiorum suorum dolis 
vestigia imprimentes pro vera, quam falsam cognoscerent, defenderunt, dedecorantes 
pontificatus maiestatem, dedecorantes veterum pontificum memoriam, dedecorantes 
religionem christianam .... Nam — ut ostendam — donatio illa, unde natum esse suum ius 
summi pontifices volunt, Silvestro pariter et Constantino fuit incognita” [translation 
modified]. 


[PDF page 51]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 31 
legitimacy for the papacy’s exercise of political and spiritual power. 
Tradition, even the internal tradition of Christianity, is in and of itself 
powerless to constitute the authenticity and juridical validity of ministe- 
rial power in general, and of the papacy in particular. 
In this case tradition is based on the historical duration, on the praxis, 
and on the doctrine of the Constantinian Church. Valla identifies it 
historically not only as a deterioration of the primeval Christian commu- 
nity, but also — and this is a much more radical position — as the overturn- 
ing of the evangelical church. Since the nature of the Constitutum is 
anti-evangelical — i.e., contrary to the Gospel — the church whose founda- 
tion and continued existence are based on it cannot be properly Christian, 
i.e., has no connection to Christ and his message. Consequently, there can 
be no valid tradition justifying a Church derived from the Constitutum, 
which stands in fundamental antithesis to the very being of the Christian 
community. 
Furthermore, within the spectrum of the Oration’s specific objective, an 
equal focus is put on the Church’s historical fallibility. Through the identi- 
fication of its actual imperfections, the Constantinian Church is portrayed 
as a deterioration of the evangelical origins of Christianity. It is a deterio- 
ration, in other words, of that which constitutes the necessary essence of 
the Church. But there is more to Valla’s historical retrospective. The 
Church has not only shown itself in its earthly existence to be at odds with 
its own origins in its practice and behavior. It has also arrived, at least in 
certain respects, at the exact opposite of itself, at a profound historical col- 
lapse, at the negation of its own nature. Implicit in Valla’s retrospective is 
the historical law of the heterogeneity of ends, which is intrinsic to every 
human institution and every political or religious movement. For Valla, 
even the Church is subject to this law during its earthly existence. This 
applies as well to its theological nature, beyond its practices or possible 
modes of behavior. 
With similar premises — indeed, remaining within the same retrospec- 
tive account of the Church’s fallibility — Valla argues (in the peroration) 
for the possibility of a renewal and authentic rebirth of the contempo- 
rary Church’s evangelical origins. In fact, “the Christian religion” could be 
radically different if the Constitutum were abrogated and thereby the 
Constantinian past of the Roman church definitively repudiated. Valla 
writes in the concluding section of the Oration: 
But in this first speech of mine I do not wish to encourage rulers and peoples 
to restrain the Pope as he surges ahead in his unbridled course and to force 
him to stay within his own borders, but only to counsel him, when perhaps 


[PDF page 52]
32 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
he has already recognized the truth, to move back voluntarily from a house 
that is not his own into the one where he belongs and into a haven from 
irrational tides and cruel storms .... I wish, how I wish that one day I might 
see — indeed, I can scarcely wait to see, particularly if it is carried out on my 
initiative — that the Pope is the vicar of Christ alone and not of Caesar as well 
.... At that time to come the Pope will be called, and really will be, Holy 
Father, father of all, father of the church. He will not provoke wars among 
Christians but, through apostolic censure and papal majesty, bring an end to 
the wars provoked by others.?° 
The abrogation of the Constitutum, together with the evangelical renewal 
of the “church of God” (ecclesia Dei) — to which the Oration, declaimed in 
the forensic space of all Christendom, specifically aspires — would no 
doubt result primarily and immediately in a different historical and spiri- 
tual role for the papacy. 
Valla repeatedly maintains that the Roman papacy’s practice of politi- 
cal power has made it the de facto political model for Christians. And since 
the politics of the papacy has been one of dominion, of conquest, and of 
subjection — even of Christian peoples and communities — such has 
become the standard politics of Christian nations and their rulers: “wicked 
men find an excuse in the Pope. For he and his companions furnish an 
example of every kind of misdeed.”?° This would certainly not be the case 
if the papacy’s politics had been of a different character, i.e. evangelical 
and properly Christian. The only proper political practice for the pope as 
vicar of Christ is “administering” Christ and the Gospels, there in the place 
where Christ took bodily form, among the poor and the weak: “as Christ 
lies dying of starvation and exposure among so many thousands of poor.”37 
This means, moreover, that the papacy’s (spiritual and ecclesiastical) 
power and rule should be executed through the communication of the 
message and through the administrative practice that are proper to it: the 
reconciliation of peoples, especially of Christian peoples with one another 
35 Thid., 175.18f.-176ff. (97): “Verum ego in hac prima nostra oratione nolo exhortare prin- 
cipes ac populos, ut papam effrenato cursu volitantem inhibeant eumque intra suos fines 
consistere compellant, sed tantum admoneant, qui forsitan iam edoctus veritatem sua 
sponte ab aliena domo in suam et ab insanis fluctibus sevisque tempestatibus in portum se 
recipiet .... Utinam, utinam aliquando videam — nec enim mihi quicquam est longius quam 
hoc videre, et presertim meo consilio effectum — ut papa tantum vicarius Christi sit et non 
etiam Cesaris .... Tunc papa et dicetur et erit pater sanctus, pater omnium, pater ecclesie, 
nec bella inter christianos excitabit, sed ab aliis excitata censura apostolica et papali 
maiestate sedabit” [translation modified]. 
36 Tbid., 174.14—16 (96): “impii homines a papa sumunt excusationem, in illo enim comi- 
tibusque eius esse omnis facinoris exemplum.” 
37 Tbid., 174.7f. (96): “cum Christus in tot milibus pauperum fame ac nuditate moriatur” 


[PDF page 53]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 33 
(“He will not provoke wars among Christians but ... bring an end to the 
wars provoked by others”). This is the politics that behooves the pope and 
to which he is bound by duty. Only thus will he be the “Holy Father” the 
one destined by vocation to evangelize. Only thus will he be the “father of 
all,” the shepherd of all believers. Only thus will he be the “father of the 
church,” the bringer of peace to Christendom — if necessary even by means 
of the “apostolic censure” that is his due, invested as he is with “papal maj- 
esty” as the Bishop of Rome, the successor to St. Peter. 
These are the objective dimensions of Valla’s “dissent” as outlined in 
the exordium and peroration of the Oration. But the subjective dimen- 
sions of that “dissent” are also made explicit in these very same sections. 
This is another aspect of Valla’s initial motive that helps to explain better, 
as if from within, the complexity of the goal towards which he strives in 
this composition. 
As a text, the Oration brings historical and ecclesiological criticism to 
bear on the jurisdictional, political, and spiritual rule assumed and exer- 
cised by the Roman papacy over the course of centuries. This exercise of 
power was taken up in accord with the Constitutum, “from which,’ accord- 
ing to the exordium, “the supreme pontiffs want to derive their legal right,” 
and which in the peroration is called “the principle of papal power.’38 
The position that Valla adopts as the ultimate justification for his criti- 
cism of the pope — his dissent towards the Bishop of Rome, the successor 
to Peter — is that he (Valla) “is imitating Paul.”39 After having made refer- 
ence to the conflict between Peter and the Apostle of the Gentiles in 
Galatians 2: — a reference that he will use again in his “letter of defense” 
to Serra regarding the Oration — Valla writes: 
But I am not a Paul who can reproach a Peter: I am rather a Paul who imi- 
tates Paul in such a way — which is something much greater — as to become 
one spirit with God, since I scrupulously obey his mandates. Personal status 
does not make anyone safe from attacks. It did not do so for Peter and for 
many others endowed with the same rank ....4° 
38 Tbid., 60.20—61.1 (4): “unde natum esse suum ius summi pontifices volunt”; 173.1f. (96): 
“principium potentie papalis.’ 
39 Tbid., 58.4ff. (2), and Setz’s notes. 
40 Tbid., 58.7ff. (2): “At non sum Paulus, qui Petrum possim reprehendere: immo Paulus 
sum, qui Paulum imitor, qaemadmodum, quod multo plus est, unus cum Deo spiritus effi- 
cior, cum studiose mandatis illius optempero. Neque aliquem sua dignitas ab increpationi- 
bus tutum reddit, que Petrum non reddidit multosque alios eodem preditos gradu ....” [The 
letter to Giovanni Serra is available in idem, Epistole, 193-209 and in English translation in 
idem, Dialectical Disputations, ed. and tr. Brian P. Copenhaver and Lodi Nauta, 2 vols. 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2012), 2:436-447; the reference to Gal. 2:1 is 
found in idem, Epistole, 204.241-243 and Dialectical Disputations, 2:444 (par. 26). Eds. ] 


[PDF page 54]
34 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
As Paul clashed with Peter over the necessity of circumcising the Gentiles 
converted to the new faith, thus Valla clashes with the Roman papacy over 
the assumption of the Constitutum as the political and spiritual norm 
for the government of the Christian community. The opposition to Peter 
in the first case, and the criticism of his successor in the second, are both 
raised in the name of evangelical freedom, which is the sole foundation of 
the community of believers in Christ. It is precisely in this similarity of 
intentions between the apostle’s action and his own Oration that Valla 
sees himself as an “imitator of Paul.” In the exordium, where this compari- 
son is made, Valla elaborates upon his Pauline imitation. To the citation of 
Galatians 2:1, Valla adds Paul’s confession (Acts 23:1ff.) to the high priest 
Ananias and his ensuing punishment: “to be struck on the mouth.’ Valla 
cites another similar instance from the Bible, this time from Jeremiah 
2o:1ff., when the priest Phasur has Jeremiah imprisoned “for his outspo- 
kenness.”*! Therefore Valla — despite the certainty of a political and spiri- 
tual “anathema” from the papacy — will openly take up the part of 
opposition to the new priesthood of the Law in the name of evangelical 
liberation from the Law. By thus obeying the Gospel’s mandates, by giving 
evidence and an open declaration (with the Oration) of his “dissent,” he 
will become similar to the apostle Paul and to the prophet Jeremiah. The 
imitation of Paul — which Valla adopts as both a justification and a the- 
matic motivation for his “dissent” towards the papacy — thus becomes a 
normative criterion for his argument in the Oration. 
Having followed in the footsteps of the Apostle in the defense of evan- 
gelical liberation from the Law, Valla wants to continue along the same 
path in his method of argumentation. This procedure consists in using 
demonstrative rhetoric, in the realms of both preaching and theology. 
This, according to Valla, was Paul’s method of “theologizing,” as he would 
eventually argue in more explicit terms in his later Encomion s. Thomae 
(Encomium of St. Thomas).4# 
Valla’s Pauline “imitation” advances on several levels in the Oration. 
First, as Paul argued against Peter by revealing the (implicit and explicit) 
contradictions in the latter’s behavior (on the one hand liberation from 
the Law, on the other making a distinction between Jews and Gentiles), 
41 Valla, De falso, 56-57 (1): “os eius verberari”; “ob libertatem loquendi.” 
42 On Valla’s imitation of Paul, whom he describes as “by far the prince of all 
theologians and the master of theologizing” (“omnium theologorum longe princeps ac 
theologandi magister”), see Camporeale, “Lorenzo Valla tra Medioevo e Rinascimento,” 
47 (= idem, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma, 169 and translated in the 
present volume, 194). 


[PDF page 55]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 35 
thus Valla lays bare the papacy’s theoretical and operative contradictions 
with respect to its necessary role as “vicariate of Christ” for an evangelical 
church. Second, Valla explicitly reaffirms (in the exordium) that his ora- 
tion should not be understood as a “Philippic,’ that is as a speech of a 
persecutory juridical character whose aim is to convict the pope.*? He has 
no intention of appealing to the Christian community, nor to any member 
of it, to employ the force of “violence” or of right against the pope or to 
deprive him of the rule usurped on the basis of the pseudo-Constitutum. 
Indeed, no one, neither a community nor a single member of a commu- 
nity, could have such authority or juridical competency. Valla is an anti- 
conciliarist, as can be seen clearly by this section of the Oration (and as 
Wolfram Setz has emphasized with great perspicacity).44 
To Valla’s mind the Oration is, let us repeat, a demonstrative mode of 
argumentation, not a judicial one. He wants to persuade the papacy and 
induce it to dismiss the “donation,” not by force but by dint of its own 
awareness of the ecclesiological and historical contradictions in which the 
Constitutum has placed the Roman church: 
I am not acting to satisfy a desire to harass anyone and to write Philippics 
against him — may I not be guilty of such a heinous deed -, but to eradicate 
error from people’s minds, to remove persons from vices and crimes by 
admonition and reproof. I would not dare say that others, instructed by me, 
should prune with steel the papal seat — vineyard of Christ — which is teem- 
ing with undergrowth, and force it to bear plump grapes instead of emaci- 
ated berries.4° 
In this passage Valla makes it clear that the protest included in his “dis- 
sent” is no different in intention or in form from Paul's “confession,” which 
is manifestly critical towards Peter. 
Finally, although aware that his Oration also undermines the spiritual 
power employed by the papacy to condemn transgressors to proscription 
from the Christian community,*® Valla refuses to behave politically and 
43 Valla, De falso, 59.3ff. (3). 
44 Tbid., 58.15-59.1f. (2) and Setz’s n. 21. 
45 Tbid., 59 (3): “Neque vero id ago, ut quenquam cupiam insectari et in eum quasi 
Philippicas scribere — hoc enim a me facinus procul absit —, sed ut errorem a mentibus 
hominum convellam, ut eos a vitiis sceleribusque vel admonendo vel increpando sum- 
moveam. Non ausim dicere, ut alii per me edocti luxuriantem nimiis sarmentis papalem 
sedem, que Christi vinea est, ferro coerceant et plenas uvas, non graciles labruscas ferre 
compellant.” But to understand Valla’s passage correctly, it is necessary to relate it directly 
to the definition of rhetoric fully discussed and established by Quintilian, Jnstitutio orato- 
ria, I1.15-21. 
46 [Le., through excommunication, anathema, or execration, as explained in Valla, De 
falso, 56.56. (1). Eds.] 


[PDF page 56]
36 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
intellectually in the manner of the Roman orator Asinius Pollio. That emi- 
nent political personage and grand orator, whom his contemporaries 
were wont to call “a man for all seasons,” had said, “I am unwilling to write 
against those who have the power to proscribe.’ Valla alludes to Pollio in 
order to take a stance diametrically opposed to him.47 Driven by his search 
for truth and justice, Valla feels that he must opt for the one posture 
towards the Christian political community that seems to guarantee 
authentic virtue in deed: 
But there is no reason why this double threat of danger [political and eccle- 
siastical proscription] should trouble me or keep me from my plan. For the 
supreme pontiff is not allowed to bind or release anyone contrary to human 
and divine law, and giving up one’s life in the defense of truth and justice is 
a mark of the greatest virtue, the greatest glory, the greatest reward .... 
Anxiety be gone, let fears retreat far away, and worries disperse! With a 
bold spirit, great confidence, and good hope, the cause of truth, the cause 
of justice, and the cause of God must be defended. No one who knows 
how to speak well can be considered a true orator unless he also dares to 
speak out.*® 
Thus Valla contrasts Roman virtue (virtus romana), which he had sub- 
jected to criticism in De vero bono (On the True Good),*9 with the courage 
(fortitudo) of a Christian. This virtue constitutes the only mode of acting, 
ie., the sole praxis possible on the ethical plane, that exhausts the full 
semantic pregnancy of the word virtus.°° And it is precisely along these 
ethical lines that the freedom of the orator — without which there can be 
no art in oratory — becomes the freedom of the Christian orator (orator 
47 On Gaius Asinius Pollio, see Quintilian, Institutio oratoria, V1.3.n0ff. (“... a man for all 
seasons’ [“... esse eum omnium horarum’]; Erasmus will use this expression in the prefa- 
tory letter to Thomas More in his Praise of Folly, and he will also dedicate one of his Adages 
to it: Desiderius Erasmus, Opera omnia (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1969-), ord. 2, tom. 1 
(1993), 286 (= pp. 389-390). Cf. Wolfgang Buchwald, Armin Hohlweg, and Otto Prinz (eds.), 
Tusculum-Lexicon griechischer und lateinischer Autoren des Altertums und des Mittelalters 
(Miinchen: Artemis, 1982), sub voce, 659. [Valla’s allusion to Pollio (Valla, De falso, 56.of. [1]: 
“nolo scribere in eos, qui possunt proscribere”) is adapted from Macrobius, Saturnalia, 
1.4.21. Eds. | 
48 Valla, De falso, 57.8-12/15—20 (2): “Verum non est causa, cur me duplex hic periculi 
terror conturbet arceatque a proposito. Nam neque contra ius fasque summo pontifici licet 
aut ligare quempiam aut solvere, et in defendenda vertitate atque iustitia profundere ani- 
mam summe virtutis, summe laudis summi premii est .... Facessat igitur trepidatio, procul 
abeant metus, timores excidant. Forti animo, magna fiducia, bona spe defendenda est 
causa veritatis, causa iustitie, causa Dei. Neque enim is verus est habendus orator, qui bene 
scit dicere, nisi et dicere audeat.” 
49 [A revised version of De voluptate. Eds. ] 
5° Valla, Repastinatio, 408-422, 73-98. Cf. Lorch, A Defense of Life, 19-130; Fois, Il pen- 
siero cristiano di Lorenzo Valla, 476-481. 


[PDF page 57]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 37 
christianus). All this is similar to Paul, writes Valla, who made his confes- 
sion to Ananias in line with his own “good conscience” (bona conscientia). 
Later, in a letter to Cardinal Landriani in defense of the Oration, Valla 
will confirm that he had been “directed by his conscience” to write what 
he did.*! These words confirm the comprehensive sense, both objective 
and subjective, of that “I dissent” that is asserted programmatically in the 
very first lines of the Oration and fully elaborated from the exordium to 
the peroration. 
3. THE ANTINOMY OF IMPERIUM AND EVANGELIUM 
The first section of the Oration deals with the relationship between impe- 
rium (rule or empire) and evangelium (the Gospel). This relationship is 
characterized by radical conflict and extreme opposition and is resolvable 
only through the reciprocal negation of the two terms. This theme is a 
constant that runs throughout the Oration. In section I — and also in sec- 
tion II, which is actually an extension of the first — this theme is treated 
specifically and is taken up as an historical and theoretical premise to the 
overall argument against the Constitutum Constantini. 
Section I is composed of four parts made up of speeches given by the 
dramatis personae involved in Constantine’s supposed donation of the 
empire to the papacy. In the manuscript tradition of the Oration, each part 
is glossed with a heading. These are indicated in Setz’s critical apparatus 
and in all likelihood are attributable to Valla himself. 
The first part of the section begins with a question posed by the Oration’s 
author himself to “kings and princes,’ those seasoned in the wielding of 
“power,” regarding the Donation’s supposed historical possibility: “would 
Constantine have ever given the empire to another?’®? The question 
posed to the wielders of power constitutes the author’s own direct dis- 
course; it is the oration of the orator Valla himself. How could the Donation 
of Constantine ever have occurred, when all of history teaches that he 
who conquers and exercises rule can never cede his own power without 
falling into an absurd repudiation of himself? 
I speak to you, kings and princes. Since it is hard for a private person to form 
any idea of a royal disposition, I probe your mind, I examine your con- 
science, I ask for your testimony: Would any one of you, had he been in 
51 Valla, Epistole, 256.2: “contentus animi conscientia.” 
52 Marginal manuscript heading (Valla, De falso, 62.5): “nunquam Constantinum fuisse 
facturum ut alteri daret imperium.” 


[PDF page 58]
38 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Constantine’s place, have thought he should act to bestow upon another 
person, by gracious liberality, the city of Rome — his own fatherland, the 
center of the world, the queen of cities, the most powerful, noblest, richest 
of peoples, which triumphed over nations and was sacred to behold ...? As 
far as I have heard or read, not one of you was ever deterred from the effort 
to increase his empire .... On the contrary, this blazing passion for extensive 
rule most of all goads and drives one who is already supremely powerful .... 
I forebear to mention how many crimes, how many abominations have 
been committed in the cause of gaining or increasing empire .... In no other 
endeavor does human recklessness normally assert itself so much and so 
fiercely .... But if dominion is apt to be sought by so great an effort, how 
much greater must be the effort to keep it! Not enlarging an empire is not so 
wretched as reducing it. Even more grotesque than not adding another's 
realm to yours is allowing yours to be added to another’s.°? 
The second part of the section contains the “speech of Constantine’s sons 
and kinsmen to him.’54 They urge the emperor not to disinherit them, giv- 
ing to others (the Roman pope) that rule which is their due in virtue of 
dynastic succession and of their service in capturing the imperial crown 
and the government of the empire. 
Father, do you really deprive, disinherit, and cast off your sons, you who 
loved your sons very much until now? We do not so much bemoan as won- 
der at your desire to strip yourself of the best and greatest part of your 
empire. But bemoan it we do, because you are transferring it to others at our 
expense and to our disgrace. What reason is there for you to cheat your chil- 
dren from the anticipated succession to your empire, when you yourself 
ruled together with your father? What have we done against you? In what 
way do we appear guilty of disrespect towards our fatherland, the name of 
Rome, and the majesty of her empire? ... If only, Caesar, we had fallen in 
battle with your reputation intact and victory secure rather than look upon 
53 Valla, De falso, 62.12—-63.1/63.15-20/64.11-22 (7-8): “Vos appello, reges ac principes, 
difficile est enim privatum hominem animi regii concipere imaginem, vestram mente 
inquiro, conscientiam scrutor, testimonium postulo: nunquid vestrum quispiam, si fuisset 
Constantini loco, faciendum sibi putasset, ut urbem Romam, patriam suam, caput orbis 
terrarum, reginam civitatum, potentissimam, nobilissimam, ditissimam populorum, tri- 
umphatricem nationum et ipso aspectu sacram, liberalitatis gratia donaret alteri ...? 
Siquidem neminem vestrum aut audivi aut legi a conatu ampliandi imperii fuisse deterri- 
tum ...: quin ipse hic ardor atque hec late dominandi cupiditas, ut quisque maxime potens 
est, ita eum maxime angit atque agitat .... Taceo quanta scelera, quot abominanda propter 
imperium assequendum ampliandum ve admissa sunt .... Adeo nusquam magis, nusquam 
atrocius grassari solet humana temeritas .... Quod si tanto conatu peti dominatus solet, 
quanto maiore necesse est conservetur? Neque enim tantopere miserum est non ampliare 
imperium quam imminuere, neque tam deforme tibi alterius regnum non accedere tuo 
quam tuum accedere alieno ....” 
54 Marginal manuscript heading (Valla, De falso, 68.17): “oratio filiorum ac necessario- 
rum Constantini ad illum.’ 


[PDF page 59]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 39 
this! You can indeed do what you want with your empire and even with us, 
with one exception, which we will fiercely uphold unto death — we shall not 
desist from the worship of the immortal gods and shall serve as a great 
example to others, so that you may know what your vaunted largesse does 
for the Christian religion ....55 
The third part of the section is the “speech of the Roman people to 
Constantine.’°° The Senatus Populusque Romanus claim for themselves 
the right of directing the affairs of the respublica and the imperial govern- 
ment of the city. They beg Constantine in the name of romana libertas not 
to subject Rome and its empire to a “barbarian,” a worshiper of a religion 
foreign and adverse to the cult of the household gods. 
Caesar, if you are unmindful of your own family and even of yourself ..., nev- 
ertheless the Senate and the People of Rome cannot be unmindful of its 
right and its reputation. For how can you arrogate to yourself so much of the 
Roman empire, which was brought forth from our blood, not yours? ... You, 
Caesar, will look after yourself, but this matter concerns us just as much as 
you. You are mortal. The empire of the Roman people must be immortal 
and, insofar as lies with us, it will be — not only the empire but our sense of 
honor as well. But shall we accept an empire of those whose religion we 
scorn? And shall we, as princes of the world, be subservient to this most 
contemptible creature? ... And, since you force us to speak rather candidly 
in support of our right, you need to realize that you have no legal claim on 
the empire of the Roman people: Julius Caesar seized rule by force, Augustus 
took over the crime and made himself the ruler by wiping out the opposing 
factions. Tiberius, Gaius, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasianus 
and all the rest plundered our freedom by the same or a similar route. You 
too became ruler after expelling or exterminating others, and I forbear to 
mention that you were an illegitimate child. Therefore, to make our mind 
known to you, Caesar, if you do not care to keep the government of Rome, 
you have sons, one of whom you may put in your place with our permission, 
and on our proposal, in accordance with the law of nature. Otherwise it is 
55 Valla, De falso, 68.17-69.7/69.25-70.2 (14): “Ita ne, pater antehac filiorum amantis- 
sime, filios privas, exheredas, abdicas? Nam, quod te optima maximaque imperii parte 
exuere vis, non tam querimur quam miramur. Querimur autem, quod eam ad alios defers 
cum nostra et iactura et turpitudine. Quid enim cause est, quod liberos tuos expectata suc- 
cesione imperii fraudas, qui ipse una cum patre regnasti? Quid in te commisimus? qua in 
te, qua in patriam, qua in nomen Romanum ac maiestatem imperii impietate digni vide- 
mur? ... Utinam nos, Cesar, salva tua dignitate atque victoria in bello contigisset occum- 
bere potius quam ista cernamus. Et tu quidem de imperio tuo ad tuum arbitratum agere 
potes atque etiam de nobis uno duntaxat excepto, in quo ad mortem usque erimus contu- 
maces: ne a cultu deorum immortalium desistamus magno etiam aliis exemplo, ut scias 
tua ista largitas quid mereatur de religione christiana ....” 
56 Marginal manuscript heading (Valla, De falso, 70.17): “oratio populi romani ad 
Constantinum.” 


[PDF page 60]
40 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
our intention to defend the public interest together with our own personal 
reputation. For this is no less an affront to the descendants of Romulus than 
was the rape of Lucretia, nor will a Brutus be wanting to offer himself as a 
leader to this people against Tarquinius in the restoration of our freedom.°” 
The final part of the section contains “Sylvester’s speech to Constantine.” 
Pope Sylvester’s discourse is entirely made up of quotations, and corre- 
sponding interpretations, from New Testament passages, mostly taken 
from the Gospel of Matthew and the Letters of Paul. 
Caesar, my excellent liege and son, ... | am a priest and a pontiff, who has to 
determine what I may allow as an offering at the altar, to protect against the 
offering of an animal that is not just impure but a viper or a snake. So con- 
sider this. Suppose you had the right to hand over to someone other than 
your sons a part of your empire containing Rome, the reigning capital of the 
world — something I do not at all believe — ; suppose this people, suppose 
Italy, suppose all the other nations, seduced as they are by worldly attrac- 
tions, would agree, against all plausibility, that they preferred to be subject 
to those whom they hate and whose religion they have hitherto spat upon. 
Even so, my most loving son — if you think you owe me some credence — 
I could still not be induced by any argument to agree with you unless 
I wished to be untrue to myself, forget my station, and almost deny my Lord 
Jesus. Your gifts, or, as you prefer, your remunerations would stain and imme- 
diately wipe out the glory, innocence, and sanctity of myself and of all those 
who will come after me, and they would block the way for those who will 
come ‘to know the truth’ [1 Tim. 2:4] .... Should I be for others, Caesar, both 
an example and a cause of wrongdoing? I who am a Christian man, priest of 
God, Roman pontiff, vicar of Christ? ... 1 know that when Peter was asked by 
the Lord from whom the kings of the earth received tribute or tax, whether 
57 Valla, De falso, 70.17-71.1/73.3-9/74.12—75.01 (16-18) “Cesar, si tu tuorum immemor es 
atque etiam tui ..., non tamen senatus populusque Romanus immemor potest esse sui iuris 
sueque dignitatis. Etenim quomodo tibi tantum permittis de imperio Romano, quod non 
tuo, sed nostro sanguine partum est? ... Tu, Cesar, quid ad te spectet, ipse videris, nobis 
autem hec res non minus quam tibi cure esse debet. Tu mortalis es, imperium populi 
Romani decet esse immortale et, quantum in nobis est, erit, neque imperium modo, verum 
etiam pudor: scilicet, quorum religionem contemnimus, eorum accipiemus imperium? et 
principes orbis terrarum huic contemptissimo homini serviemus? ... Atque ut intelligas — 
quandoquidem nos pro iure nostro cogis asperius loqui — nullum tibi in populi Romani 
imperio ius esse: Cesar vi dominatum occupavit, Augustus et in vitium successit et adver- 
sariorum partium profligatione se dominum fecit, Tiberius, Gaius, Claudius, Nero, Galba, 
Otho, Vitellius, Vespasianus ceterique aut eadem aut simili via libertatem nostram predati 
sunt, tu quoque aliis expulsis aut interemptis dominus effectus es .... Quare, ut tibi nostram 
mentem testificemur, Cesar ..., nobis in animo est publicam amplitudinem cum privata 
dignitate defendere. Neque enim minor hec iniuria Quiritum quam olim fuit violata 
Lucretia, neque nobis deerit Brutus, qui contra Tarquinum se ad libertatem recuperandam 
huic populo prebeat ducem....” 
58 Marginal manuscript heading (Valla, De falso, 76.12): “oratio Silvestri ad Con- 
stantinum.” 


[PDF page 61]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 41 
from their sons or from foreigners, He declared, when Peter answered ‘from 
foreigners, ‘Therefore their sons are free’ [Matt. 17:24-27]. But if all people 
are my sons, Caesar, as they surely are, all of them will be free, no one will 
pay anything .... Our power is the power of the keys, as the Lord says: ‘I shall 
give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven’ [Matt. 16:19] .... Nothing can be 
added to this power, nothing to this rank, nothing to this kingdom. Whoever 
is not content with this is demanding something else for himself from the 
devil, who dared to say even to the Lord: ‘I shall give you all the kingdoms of 
the world, if you fall on the ground and worship me’ [Matt. 4:9]. Therefore, 
Caesar — allow me to say this without offense — do not play the devil for me, 
you who tell Christ, namely me, to accept kingdoms of the world that are 
given by you. I prefer to repudiate them than to possess them; and — to speak 
of unbelievers but, I hope, future believers — do not turn me from an angel of 
light into an angel of darkness for those whose hearts I want to draw into 
piety, whose necks I do not want to bring under the yoke. I want to subject 
them to myself ‘with the sword that is the word of God’ [Eph. 6:17], not with 
a sword of iron, so that they may not become worse, kick back, gore me, and, 
vexed by my error, blaspheme the name of God .... Finally, to come to an 
end, on this matter hear that remark which He uttered as if directed to you 
and me: ‘Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things 
that are God's’ [Matt. 22:21]. Wherefore it turns out that neither you, Caesar, 
should give up what is yours nor should I accept what is Caesar’s. Even if you 
should offer it a thousand times, I would never accept.5? 
59 Valla, De falso, 76.12-77.15/78.11-13/83.4—9/84.4-23/84.28-85.4 (21, 25-26): “Princeps 
optime ac fili, Cesar, ... ego sacerdos sum ac pontifex, qui dispicere debeo, quid ad altare 
patiar offerri, ne forte non dico immundum animal offeratur, sed vipera aut serpens. Itaque 
sic habeas: si foret tui iuris partem imperii cum regina orbis, Roma, alteri tradere quam 
filiis — quod minime sentio -, si populus hic, si Italia, si cetere nationes sustinerent, ut, quos 
oderunt et quorum religionem adhuc respuunt, capti illecebris seculi eorum imperio 
obnoxii esse vellent — quod impossibile est —, tamen, si quid mihi credendum putas, fili 
amantissime, ut tibi assentirer ulla adduci ratione non possem, nisi vellem mihi ipsi esse 
dissimilis et condicionem meam oblivisci ac propemodum dominum Iesum abnegare. Tua 
enim munera sive, ut tu vis, tue remunerationes et gloriam et innocentiam et sanctimo- 
niam meam atque omnium, qui mihi successuri sunt, polluerent ac prorsus everterent 
viamque iis, qui ‘ad cognitionem veritatis’ venturi sunt, intercluderent .... Ego, Cesar, aliis 
quoque sim et exemplum et causa delinquendi? christianus homo, sacerdos Dei, pontifex 
Romanus, vicarius Christi ... qui scio a Domino interrogatum Petrum a quibusnam reges 
terre acciperent tributum censumve, a filiis an ab alienis? et, cum hic respondisset ‘ab 
alienis, ab eodem dictum: ‘ergo liberi sunt filii” Quod si omnes filii mei sunt, Cesar, — ut 
certe sunt — omnes liberi erunt, nihil quisquam solvet .... Nostra potestas est potestas cla- 
vium, dicente Domino: ‘Tibi dabo claves regni celorum’ .... Nihil ad hanc potestatem, nihil 
ad hanc dignitatem, nihil ad hoc regnum adiici potest. Quo qui contentus non est, aliud 
sibi quoddam a diabolo postulat, qui etiam Domino dicere ausus est: ‘Tibi dabo omnia 
regna mundi, si cadens in terrram adoraveris me. Quare, Cesar, — cum pace tua dictum 
sit —, noli mihi diabolus effici, qui Christum, idest me regna mundi a te data accipere 
iubeas, malo enim illa spernere quam possidere; et — ut aliquid de infidelibus, sed ut spero 
futuris fidelibus loquar — noli me de angelo lucis reddere illis angelum tenebrarum, 
quorum corda ad pietatem inducere volo, non ipsorum cervici iugum imponere, et 
‘gladio, quod est verbum Dei, non gladio ferreo mihi subiicere, ne deteriores efficiantur, 


[PDF page 62]
42 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
The orations addressed to Constantine regarding the supposed transfer of 
the empire to the papacy serve to define the historical dimensions of the 
Donation. These historical dimensions in turn constitute the forensic 
space of the speeches: the temporal and ideological space both of imperial 
Rome (from the beginning of the fourth century on, after the “Christian” 
emperor's victory at the Milvian Bridge in 312) and of the Roman-Catholic 
church (Roman-Catholic in the sense that Christianity became the state 
religion of the Roman Empire; it was in the curial and Lateran tradition as 
a state religion that it arrived at the Constitutum). 
Furthermore, within this forensic space the orations have the function 
of highlighting the comparison between Constantine, who offers the 
empire to the papacy, and Sylvester, who in the name of the Gospel rejects 
the donation. In this comparison between Constantine and Sylvester — 
animated by the speeches that express the contrasting positions of the 
respective personages — is revealed, in its various dimensions, the antin- 
omy between imperium and evangelium.®° 
Having explained the formal composition of section I of the Oration, it 
remains now to analyze this central theme as debated by Valla and to 
examine the method of argumentation employed: the demonstration of 
the irresolvable antinomy, and thus of the radical contradiction, between 
imperium and evangelium. 
As was highlighted in the introduction, Valla’s Oration proceeds with 
arguments aimed at identifying the explicit and implicit contradictions in 
ne recalcitrent, ne cornu me feriant, ne nomen Dei meo irritati errore blasphement .... 
Cuius ad extremum, ut iam finem faciam, illam de hac re sententiam accipe, quam quasi 
inter me et te tulit: ‘Reddite, que sunt Cesaris, Cesari, et que sunt Dei, Deo, quo fit, ut nec 
tu, Cesar, tua relinquere neque ego, que Cesaris sunt, accipere debeam, que, vel si millies 
offeras, nunquam accipiam.” 
60 In addition to what has been said here about the speeches constituting temporal and 
ideological historical spaces, it should be added that Valla employed in section I of the 
Oration (and perhaps for the first time in the context of early humanism) the historio- 
graphico-rhetorical genre developed and used by Thucydides in his Histories, which Valla 
would be the first to translate into Latin. On Valla’s proemium to his Latin version of the 
Histories, see Camporeale, “Lorenzo Valla tra Medioevo e Rinascimento,” 126-131 (= idem, 
Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma, 250-255 and translated in the present 
volume, 281-286); and above all Giacomo Ferrau, “La concezione storiografica del Valla: i 
Gesta Ferdinandi Regis Aragonum, in Besomi and Regoliosi (eds.), Lorenzo Vallae l’'umanesimo 
italiano, 265-310. On Valla’s translation of the Histories, see Giovan Battista Alberti, “Tucidide 
nella traduzione latina di Lorenzo Vala,’ Studi italiani di filologia classica, n.s., 29 (1957): 
224-249; idem (ed.), introduction to Thucydidis Historiae, 3 vols. (Roma: Typis publicae offi- 
cinae polygraphicae, 1972-2000), vol. 1 (1972) [idem, “Lorenzo Valla tradutore di Tucidide,’ 
in Tradizione classica e letteratura umanistica per Alessandro Perosa, ed. Roberto Cardini et 
al. (Roma: Bulzoni, 1985), 243-253]; and Filippo Ferlauto, Il testo di Tucidide e la traduzione 
latina di Lorenzo Valla (Palermo: Universita di Palermo, Istituto di filologia greca, 1979). 


[PDF page 63]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 43 
the “document of donation” (donationis pagina) as well as at exposing its 
historical inconsistencies. Within this perspective, the attempt to “falsify” 
the “document,” i.e. the text providing the “principle of papal power,’ 
begins with a political and theological observation aimed at demonstrat- 
ing the historical unreality of the Constitutum and its supposed Christian 
authenticity. This is the point of the entire first section (and, as we shall 
see, of the second as well). More clearly: if the “document of donation” 
indeed possessed the historical reality attributed to it, then that reality is 
in clear contradiction with the Christian Gospel, on the one hand, and 
with the contemporary politics of imperial power, on the other. 
The Constitutum in and of itself is placed primarily outside of, if not at 
the extreme opposite pole from, the Christian, evangelical world. In fact it 
could not be countenanced with regard to a church (ecclesia) that is within 
the boundaries of the Gospel, but only in view of a Church characterized 
by enormous political and religious power. The Constitutum lies to one 
side or the other of a Christendom based on saving grace and the evangeli- 
cal dictates of the Sermon on the Mount, to which Valla’s composition 
continually refers. 
In other words, Valla shows how the Constitutum is entirely dislocated 
and self-contradictory with respect to both chronological and geographi- 
cal parameters. By its very nature, it is unthinkable unless outside the 
space and time, i.e., outside the contextual circle, of the early Christian 
church, which was profoundly evangelical and completely consistent with 
itself. (This last point is an historical presupposition about early 
Christianity that underlies the Oration and other of Valla’s major works.) 
Similarly, Valla demonstrates that the Constitutum is placed outside the 
proper political context of Roman rule and the Roman Empire. He repeats 
in various ways and according to diverse points of view that the Donation 
would have been an absurd event given the historical nature and the 
internal logic of Roman, and especially Constantine’s, imperial power. It 
would have been an event, therefore, entirely foreign and inconceivable 
within the historical reality of the Roman Empire, which had achieved the 
apex of its military might and internal political cohesion precisely with 
the advent of the emperor Constantine.®! 
61 Cf. Giulio Giannelli and Santo Mazzarino, Trattato di storia romana, 2 vols. (Roma: 
Tumminelli, 1962), vol. 2: LImpero Romano, in particular part V: Il basso impero e la ‘pros- 
pettiva carismatica) I. Dal Milvio al Frigido (312-394), (pp. 421-490); Andreas Alfoldi, 
Costantino tra paganesimo e cristianesimo, tr. Augusto Fraschetti (Bari: Laterza, 1976) 
(English edition: The Conversion of Constantine and Pagan Rome, tr. Harold Mattingly 
[ Oxford: Clarendon, 1948]); Amaldo Momigliano, I! conflitto tra paganesimo e cristianesimo 


[PDF page 64]
44 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
The “document of donation,” therefore, is placed by Valla within the 
coordinates of a double contradiction. The “document” contradicts both 
the evangelical character of early Christianity (until the first decades 
of the fourth century) and the nature of the Roman Empire at the time. 
In light of this collocation/dislocation, the “document of donation” — 
understood both as a possible event and as an actual document — loses all 
sense. Language and reality, signifier and referent, lack all historical and 
ideological authenticity. The falseness of the Constitutum, therefore — its 
non-truth both historically and ecclesiologically — derives from the fact 
that it places itself of its own accord outside of every context. Indeed, it is 
configured in opposition to the very times and spaces that are assumed as 
its immediate referent as a text. 
That these are the conclusions reached by Valla will become clearer 
with an in-depth reading of section I. The speeches of which it is com- 
posed are directed towards the historical presentation of the following 
phenomena. Of first importance is the nature and historical manifestation 
of the Roman Empire, with special attention to the form of imperial power 
generally and to the degree and mode in which it was taken up and exer- 
cised by Constantine specifically. Second is the Gospel, as a message of 
“servitude” (servitium) placed at the foundation of the Christian commu- 
nity, and specifically as it must be (and was in fact) put into practice by 
one particular member of that community (the evangelical polis), i-e. the 
“vicar of Christ.” Third and finally, the opposition between imperium and 
evangelium is brought to the fore. 
The first point is elaborated in the first three speeches: the discourse of 
the orator (i.e. the author of the Oration) on Constantine and the sup- 
posed donation; that of Constantine’s kinsmen, who claim for themselves 
the dynastic succession to the government of the empire; and that of the 
Senate and the People of Rome, who urge Constantine not to abuse his 
imperial power, a military and political despotism that in itself already 
constitutes a usurpation of the respublica as a res privata.®2 The second 
point is treated in Pope Sylvester’s statement on the nature of the “servi- 
tude” of the Church's authority as it is exercised ministerially, i.e. in the 
name of Christ. Servitude is a defining quality of evangelium, which is 
the foundation of Christianity. All together, finally, the speeches are 
nel secolo IV: saggi, tr. Anna Davies Morpurgo (Torino: Einaudi, 1968) [English edition = The 
Conflict between Paganism and Christianity in the Fourth Century: Essays (Oxford: Clarendon, 
1963)]. 62 [A “private affair,” as opposed to the republic (respublica), which is the “public affair” 
par excellence. Eds. ] 


[PDF page 65]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 45 
declaimed — and put in a position to be compared — to stress the falseness 
of the Constitutum, inasmuch as the “document of donation” is disfigured 
by the antinomy of imperium/evangelium. And since the terms of this 
antinomy are radically irreconcilable, it follows that the Constitutum rests 
on one massive contradiction that comprehends all the other contradic- 
tions underlying the “document of donation” — like the one Valla has 
already brought to the fore, and like others that will be revealed in the 
sequel. 
With incisive strokes and a dense succession of abridged formulas, 
Valla seems in the first three speeches to want to explain the origins, the 
self-manifestation, and the very nature of power in and of itself. He 
sketches what amounts to an historical phenomenology of power, with 
particular attention to the form and event of imperial power.® Imperial 
power has its birth with the coming of Alexander the Great, who, accord- 
ing to Valla, establishes imperial rule and puts an end to the Greek polis. It 
is then broadened and developed by the Roman Caesars during the 
decline of the Roman respublica. Finally, it reaches its apex with 
Constantine. He (and his successors down to Theodosius) then, exercising 
absolute rule, decides the fate of Rome, “capital of the world,” by depriving 
the civitas of its foundation: the senatus populusque romanus. 
As Setz has noted, Alexander is for Valla the prototype of empire. The 
humanist draws a sketch of him as the first incarnation of imperial power; 
then he engraves the image with the person and power of Constantine. 
[ Alexander] seemed to himself to have accomplished nothing at all without 
the subjugation of the West and all its nations either by force or by the 
authority of his name. Indeed, he had already planned to explore and bring 
under his control the Ocean as well as any other world there might be ....°4 
Constantine is no different: 
This was a man who launched wars on nations out of lust for rule; who had 
deprived allies and relatives of their empire after pursuing them in civil 
war ...; who remembered, just like the other Caesars, that he had taken his 
rule not through senatorial election and consent of the plebs, but through 
an army, weapons, and war.®* 
63 Setz, Lorenzo Vallas Schrift, 59ff.; Valla, De falso, 64, n. 43; 74, 0. 70. 
64 Valla, De falso, 64.4-8 (7) and Setz’s n. 43: “Ipse sibi nihil effecisse videbatur, nisi et 
occidentem et omnes nationes aut vi aut nominis sui auctoritate sibi tributarias reddidis- 
set. Parum dico: iam Oceanum transire et, si quis alius orbis esset, explorare ac suo subi- 
cere arbitrio destinaverat ...” [translation modified]. 
65 Jbid., 65.9-11/19-21 (9): “... hominem, qui cupiditate dominandi nationibus bella 
intulisset, socios affinesque bello civili persecutus imperio privasset ...; qui se meminisset 
more aliorum Cesarum non electione patrum consensuque plebis, sed exercitu, armis, 
bello dominatum occupasse ....” 


[PDF page 66]
46 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Therefore, Valla argues, power is nothing other than the human “lust for 
rule” far and wide. Such was its origin, and such is thus its nature. The 
advent of power and its self-manifestation throughout history are deter- 
mined by the constants of its own internal logic, by the requirements nec- 
essary for its subsistence and survival. Power can perpetuate itself only by 
reaffirming itself, which is possible only to the degree that it expands itself 
in depth and in breadth in the direction of absolute and total rule. Since 
power is by its nature identified with rule, it had to rise to the forms and 
strategies of imperial rule: expanding to the greatest extent possible by 
means of the force of arms and territorial conquest. Its very survival was 
necessarily determined by its own increase and by the destruction of every 
other competing power. 
It was first the use of force against the civitas — founded on the senatus 
populusque romanus — with the resulting rule over the Roman Republic, 
and then the subjection of other peoples outside of Rome and Italy, that 
established Caesar and Caesarism, the emperor and the Roman Empire. 
Through their conquest of power, those “who suppressed the Republic” 
gained full control over civil and political liberties: “the Roman people ... 
lost its true Romanness.’ That conquest went on to be gradually consoli- 
dated through the mass of power that flowed to the Caesars from the politi- 
cal subjugation of other peoples and the territorial extension of the empire, 
which was executed by the military force the emperor himself had created. 
Here Valla reinterprets Jerome’s statement that “it is the army that makes 
the emperor,’ making it so that its truth is understood adequately only if 
the terms of the proposition are taken as reciprocally convertible. That is to 
say that it is true that the army makes the emperor, but it is equally true, 
and perhaps historically more precise, that it is the emperor who creates 
the army and establishes his rule, the emperor who executes the conquest 
of power and the destruction of civil and political liberties.®© 
Valla’s argument is continuously unfolded along lines of historical 
induction — the specific method of composition in section I, as should 
now be evident from what has been said. If power is essentially “the effort 
to increase empire,” and such turns out to be historically true, then the 
Donation can be nothing other than an historical absurdity. It would be an 
event in no way in agreement with the nature and existence of Roman 
°© Ibid., 74, n. 70 (the quotation “who suppressed the Republic” [“qui ... oppressere 
Rempublicam’] is from the Elegantie, IV.70 suffragia, in Lorenzo Valla, Opera omnia, ed. 
Eugenio Garin, 2 vols. [Torino: Bottega d’Erasmo, 1962], 1145) and 165.14f. (88); 174.22 (96): 
“populus Romanus ... veram illam Romanitatem perdidit’; 65, n. 46. 


[PDF page 67]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 47 
power, which with the advent of Constantine had risen to the apex of 
imperial power. The Donation would have brought about the very nega- 
tion and self-destruction of the power that Constantine had established 
for himself and greatly reinforced with conquests on the borders of the 
empire and victories over his rivals. 
Hence — according to Valla — the attempt of the Constitutum and the 
Legenda Silvestri (Legend of Sylvester) to posit the strictest of ties between 
Constantine’s abdication of the Western Empire in favor of the papacy 
and his conversion to Christianity. “Because he had become a Christian” 
is the response to whoever objects to the Donation and considers impos- 
sible such an imperial gesture towards the papacy.®” But the evidence of 
the “document of donation,” counters Valla, testifies against itself; indeed, 
it would stress with greater force the falseness of the Donation. The irrec- 
oncilable relationship between imperium and evangelium would sink the 
imperial gesture deeper into the void of inexplicability. If Constantine’s 
conversion to Christianity had indeed been authentic, he should not 
have abdicated his imperial power but rather put it in the service of 
Christians: 
In fact, if you wish to show yourself a Christian, to demonstrate your piety, 
to provide for — I do not say the Roman church, but the church of God — you 
should now, now above all, play the prince, to fight for those who cannot 
and must not fight, to keep safe through your authority those who are sub- 
ject to plots and injuries.®8 
Valla proceeds insistently, with greater urgency and still in accordance 
with his historical criticism of the imperial regime. If Constantine had 
become a Christian, then in conformity with his evangelical faith he 
should have restored civil and political liberty to the people of Rome and 
to all the other peoples subject to the empire. In direct contrast to what 
the Constitutum purports, Constantine, if he had remained faithful to his 
Christian duty, should have “restored freedom to the cities, not replaced 
their lord” with the “vicar of Christ”!®9 
What is more, it was in such an actual liberation from imperial domina- 
tion that the “sacrament of truth” could have been revealed, the sacrament 
67 Jbid., 66.3ff. (10): “quia affectus erat Christianus.’ 
68 [bid., 66.15-20 (10): Tu vero, si christianum te ostendere, si pietatem indicare tuam, si 
consultum non dico Romane ecclesie vis, sed ecclesie Dei, nunc, precipue nunc principem 
agas, ut pugnes pro iis, qui pugnare non possunt nec debent, ut eos tua auctoritate tutos 
reddas, qui insidiis iniuriisque obnoxii sunt.” 
69 [bid., 66.9f. (10): “restituere urbibus libertatem, non mutare dominum” [translation 
modified]. 


[PDF page 68]
48 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
that the God of Israel had demanded for the Hebrew people from their 
ancient masters and imperial conquerors: 
God wanted the sacrament of truth to be made manifest to Nebuchadnezzar, 
Cyrus, Ahasuerus, and many other princes, and yet he demanded of none of 
them to withdraw from empire or to make a gift of part of his realm, but only 
to give back freedom to the Hebrews and to protect them from hostile 
neighbors. This was enough for the Jews. This will be enough for the 
Christians too. Did you become a Christian, Constantine? Yet it is most 
improper for you now as a Christian emperor to have a smaller dominion 
than you had as an unbeliever. Dominion is a certain special gift of God, for 
which even pagan princes are thought to be chosen by God.”° 
The transfer of the (Western) Empire to the papacy (after Constantine’s 
victory at the Milvian Bridge) would also have encountered the opposi- 
tion of the Roman Senate; it would have entered into full conflict with the 
will of the highest legitimate authority of the Roman civitas. This is the 
other historical reference central to Valla’s argument about the effectual 
impossibility, in right and in fact, of the Donation of Constantine. 
How could the Roman Senate have accepted the further deprivation of 
its autonomy, of its political and civil power, and allowed itself to be 
reduced to conditions still worse than those imposed by the emperors? 
The loss of civil and political freedom, which the Senate of Rome had suf- 
fered at the hands of the Caesars, was now to be perpetuated by 
Constantine in favor of a Christian, a worshiper of a divinity foreign to the 
Roman civitas: 
But shall we accept an empire of those whose religion we scorn? And shall 
we, as princes of the world, be subservient to this most contemptible crea- 
ture? ... tum over the very capital of the kingdom to a foreigner of the lowli- 
est kind?7! 
The Senate’s opposition to Constantine’s deed (the Constitutum’s sup- 
posed donation) would have been voiced, as far as Valla is concerned, in 
terms necessarily and consistently in accordance with the political power 
70 Ibid., 66.20-67.3 (10): “Nabuchodonosor, Cyro, Assuero multisque aliis principibus 
sacramentum veritatis Deus aperiri voluit, a nullo tamen eorum exegit, ut imperio cederet, 
ut partem regni donaret, sed tantum libertatem Hebreis redderet eosque ab infestantibus 
finitimis protegeret. Hoc satis fuit Iudeis, hoc sat erit et Christianis. Factus es, Costantine, 
christianus? at indignissima res est christianum te nunc imperatorem minori esse princi- 
patu, quam fueras infidelis. Est enim principatus precipuum quoddam Dei munus, ad 
quem gentiles etiam principes a Deo eligi existimantur’” [translation modified]. 
7 Ibid., 73.7-9/74.7f. (17): “... quorum religionem contemnimus, eorum accipiemus 
imperium? et principes orbis terrarum huic contemptissimo homini serviemus? ... ipsum 
regni caput peregrino atque humillimo homini addicere?” 


[PDF page 69]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 49 
that was technically still its legitimate right under Roman law, although at 
this point only partially and formally. The Senate had to act resolutely 
towards Constantine in defense of its power — as a last attempt to recover 
its strength on its deathbed, which would in fact happen during the fourth 
century — and claim its former republican freedom to the extent still 
possible. 
In other words, for Valla — particularly in this first section — if Constan- 
tine had actually instituted the Constitutum, he would have acted in con- 
tradiction with the very nature of his imperial power. Similarly, if the 
Senate had quietly suffered the transfer of the empire, it would have repu- 
diated itself. It alone would have deprived itself of its authority and ancient 
republican liberty, soiled by Caesar and gradually usurped by his succes- 
sors. Therefore Valla has the Senate’s speech to the emperor end with the 
lapidary assertion: “you have no legal claim on the empire of the Roman 
people.” 
With the first three speeches (of the “orator,” of Constantine’s kinsmen, 
and of the Senate), Valla aimed to expose the Donation’s historical unreal- 
ity by demonstrating its irreconcilability with the historical reality of 
Roman power generally and especially of Constantine’s imperial power. 
The nature and logic of imperium — brought forth by Valla through his 
analysis of the historical phenomenology of power — cannot lead to an act 
like the Donation without slipping into the self-negation both of imperium 
and of whoever enjoys its power. With the final speech, of pope Sylvester, 
the humanist goes on to treat the other — and not dissimilar — historical 
and ideological irreconcilability of the donation and its acceptance: the 
irreconcilability of imperium with the evangelium of the “vicar of Christ.’ 
Sylvester’s assent to the transfer of the (Western) Empire to the papacy 
would have entailed the negation of his own position as the “vicar of 
Christ,” as head of the Church (caput ecclesiae) in the apostolic adminis- 
tration of the pontifical office (munus pontificale). Just as Constantine 
would have repudiated his own status as the supreme wielder of Roman 
power if he had ceded the empire — an absurdity — thus Pope Sylvester 
would have committed the greatest possible betrayal of his evangelical 
faith — also an absurdity in the context of Christianity in its first few cen- 
turies. But, Valla reaffirms, Pope Sylvester was fully aware of being at the 
head of that “Christian army” — an army in stark contrast to the Roman 
legions — in which the convert Constantine, general of the Roman mili- 
tary, was a mere “recruit.”” 
72 Tbid., 78.12f. (21); 83.16 (26); 76.16 (21): “in christiana militia tiro.’ 


[PDF page 70]
50 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
A patchwork of passages from the Old and New Testaments (citations 
typical for those with an evangelical bent), Sylvester's speech hinges on 
two points. First, the Gospel’s significance as bringer of “salvation” and 
“redemption” comes to the fore, words whose semantics Valla analyzes in 
terms of “liberation.” Second, the Gospel is essentially understood as a 
message against power and against rule. For Valla, the message of the 
christianus homo is essentially a direct and radical antithesis to the “lust 
for domination,” where power and rule have their origin and on which 
they constantly nourish themselves in historical reality.”* 
Therefore Pope Sylvester must refuse the imperial gift. Otherwise he 
would have “to deny the lord Jesus,” and he would be untrue to himself as 
the one who represents Christ (personam Christi gerens). If he had 
accepted the donation, Sylvester would have failed to overcome the temp- 
tation that Satan offered to Christ in the desert. And he, the vicar of Christ, 
would have been transformed from an “angel of light” into an “angel of 
darkness.” Sylvester would have turned the pope’s succession from Peter 
into its opposite, ie. a succession from Judas, which (Valla has Sylvester 
say), “would stain and immediately wipe out ... my successors and block 
the way for those who will come to know the truth.’”4 
Moreover, Sylvester’s “acceptance” of the Donation would have brought 
with it (as in fact it did after the establishment of the Constitutum) the 
distortion of the “power of the keys.” Apostolic power, whose nature and 
whose foundation are described in the Scriptures, would have undergone 
(as actually happened in the history of the papacy) an illicit enlargement, 
in truth a perverse disjunction with regard to rule and the earthly kingdom 
with which Satan had tempted Christ: “I shall give you all the kingdoms 
of the world.” But Christ refused Satan, and he forbid Peter (and his vicar 
“in the person of Peter”) from wounding (and from defending himself) 
with the sword, from resorting to force and to the power of worldly rule.”5 
The papacy, therefore, has only a spiritual function, the “power” (potes- 
tas) flowing from the “sword that is the word of God.” This “sword-word” 
is not only irreconcilable with worldly power, but it is also understood as 
the exact opposite of rule deriving from the “sword of iron.” It will never 
be permissible to use such a weapon to govern the Christian community 
or subject the world to the “faith” (fides). The “power of the keys,’ an 
3 Tbid., 83.20 (26) and n. no. 
4 Tbid., 77.1-15 (21): “qui mihi successuri sunt, polluerent ac prorsus everterent 
viamque iis, qui ad agnitionem veritatis venturi sunt, intercluderent.” 
© Thid., 83.21-84.8 (26): “potestas clavium’; “in persona Petri.” 


[PDF page 71]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 51 
evangelical ministry of openness and liberation, comes virtually to be 
defined in direct contrast to the “power of the two swords” and thus in 
contrast to the ecclesiological politics attached to it from the Decree of 
Gelasius to Boniface VIII’s Unam sanctam. 
The “power of the two swords,” in fact, not only constitutes an impos- 
sible marriage (desired in Unam sanctam), but it cannot even be justified 
by the Gelasian distinction (of powers and the respective wielders of 
power) between spiritual and temporal rule. This is because rule and 
power only exist in worldly form. The spiritual and apostolic function can 
be neither one nor the other. Rather it is an evangelical alternative that 
consists solely in the “servitude” of its ministry, the “servitude” of the “pon- 
tifical office” that is by nature and design the exact opposite of any tempo- 
ral government whatsoever. The “sword that is the word of God” is the 
negation of the “iron sword” that establishes and violently imposes power 
and rule. It is the substantial reversal, in the context of the spiritual realm, 
of every political government in the world. 
Sylvester’s speech thus arrives at the height of the contradiction implicit 
in the Donation and in its supposed historical possibility: the conflict 
between the “kingdom of God’ and the “kingdom of Caesar.’”* Within the 
proper dimensions of the original Christian message, the two “kingdoms” 
are placed on opposite slopes on account of their mutual exclusivity and 
the correlation of their antitheses. Sylvester’s concluding words — and the 
defining passage for the entire speech — come from the classic text of 
Matthew, here reinterpreted (compared with the traditional reading of 
the text) to stress as much as possible the diversity and incompatibility 
between the two “kingdoms”: 
Finally, to come to an end, on this matter hear that remark which He uttered 
as if directed to you and me: ‘Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, 
and to God the things that are God’s’ [Matt. 22:21]. Wherefore it turns out 
that neither you, Caesar, should give up what is yours nor should I accept 
what is Caesar’s. Even if you should offer it a thousand times, I would never 
accept.”7 
This biblical text specifically highlights the contrast between the “Roman 
emperor” and the “vicar of Christ.” The former wields the power of 
76 Jbid., 82.1ff. (24): “regnum celi”; “regnum seculare.’ 
77 |bid., 84.28-85.4 (26): “Cuius ad extremum, ut iam finem faciam, illam de hac re sen- 
tentiam accipe, quam quasi inter me et te tulit: ‘Reddite, que sunt Cesaris, Cesari, et que 
sunt Dei, Deo, quo fit, ut nec tu, Cesar, tua relinquere neque ego, que Cesaris sunt, accipere 
debeam, que vel si millies offeras, nunquam accipiam.” 


[PDF page 72]
52 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
imperium; the latter is an apostle of evangelium. The former is an incarna- 
tion of power in the form of Roman “rule”; the latter is anti-power incar- 
nate in the form of Christian “servitude.” 
The conflict between imperium and evangelium (and their representa- 
tives) is made to derive directly from their respective natures and histori- 
cal forms: each one manifests itself and exists as the opposite of the other. 
Their reciprocal contradiction is so radical that if the two terms were to be 
placed outside of their natural and necessary logic, the same contradic- 
tion would be duplicated inside each of the terms themselves taken indi- 
vidually. If Constantine puts the Donation into effect, he repudiates 
himself and self-destructs in his imperium. If Sylvester consents to the 
Donation, he betrays himself and his evangelium. He would deny the abso- 
lute difference between the Gospel and worldly power, and he would 
destroy it by turning it into its opposite. 
Therefore, if the donation had in reality occurred, it would have been a 
transaction (Valla will later call it a “collusion”) in which Constantine and 
the Roman Empire on the one hand, and Sylvester and Christendom on 
the other, fell into complete contradiction with themselves and with their 
historical reality. All this serves to identify the radical antinomy between 
imperium and evangelium as the greatest and all-inclusive contradiction 
of the Constitutum. This antinomy corrupts the whole Constitutum from 
its roots: both the “Constantinian Church,” existing, theorized, and in fact 
deriving from it; and the theocratic ideology of the papacy, gradually 
developed until virtually dogmatized by the Bishop of Rome. 
The particular conclusions of Pope Sylvester's speech set up the transi- 
tion to section II of the Oration. Valla returns to direct discourse and pro- 
ceeds from arguing about the historico-ideological inauthenticity of the 
Constitutum to demonstrating the absence of documentary sources for 
Sylvester’s theoretical “acceptance” of the donation. 
There seems to be no evidence at all, he writes, either direct or indirect, 
that such an “acceptance” ever occurred. But if Sylvester had never 
“accepted” the Donation, i.e. never effectively received it in a formal man- 
ner and according to juridical norms, then the Donation could not be 
endowed with any real moment, either political or jurisdictional: 
Let us move on. To believe in that donation, which your document mentions, 
there has to be some evidence of Sylvester's acceptance. None now exists .... 
We do not have to think that the donation was accepted just because the 
grant is mentioned in the document about the donation. On the contrary, we 
must say that the donation was never made because there is no mention of 
an acceptance. There is more evidence against you that Sylvester rejected 


[PDF page 73]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 53 
the gift than that Constantine wanted to make it. ‘A benefaction cannot be 
bestowed upon someone who does not want it. [Digest 50, 17, 69]”8 
Valla’s argument here — as in the whole of the Oration — is rather complex 
and variously elaborated, even with a view to its form. It will suffice to 
emphasize one particular aspect of it: the rhetorical and forensic strategy 
of irony. Valla uses irony, which will play an important role throughout 
the Oration, from the very beginning of his discourse both to reveal the 
internal contradictions of the opponent’s case and to unmask the latter’s 
ignorance and guilty conscience with regard to the case at hand. Consider 
the following witticisms and their immediate context, all taken from this 
section: 
‘we do not know anything about this, you answer [i.e., about the signs and 
practices judicially required in a transaction of delivery and possession]. So 
I imagine that everything was accomplished in the dead of night, and that is 
why no one saw anything. All right, Sylvester had possession: Who deprived 
him of it? For neither he nor any of his successors remained in possession in 
perpetuity, at least down to Gregory the Great ... What an amazing episode! 
The Roman empire, acquired with so much effort and with so much blood, 
was acquired or lost by Christian priests so calmly and so quietly ... and... no 
one at all knows by whom this was done, when, how, and for how long. You 
would think that Sylvester ruled in the woods among trees, not in Rome 
among men, and was expelled by winter rains and chills, not by people.”9 
No greater evidence is needed for section II. It will suffice to quote from its 
concluding passage, as illustrative as any of Valla’s rhetorical use of irony: 
You do not perceive that, if the Donation of Constantine is true, the 
emperor — I am speaking of the one in the Latin West — has nothing left. 
What sort of Roman emperor or king will he be, if any holder of his kingdom 
78 Tbid., 85.20-86.6 (28): “Age porro, ut credamus istam donationem, de qua facit pagina 
vestra mentionem, debet constare etiam de acceptatione Silvestri. Nunc de illa non con- 
stat .... Nec quia in pagina privilegii de donatione fit mentio, putandum est fuisse accepta- 
tum, sed e contrario, quia non fit mentio de acceptatione, dicendum est non fuisse 
donatum. Ita plus contra vos facit hunc donum respuisse quam illum dare voluisse, et ‘ben- 
eficium in invitum non confertur.” 
79 Tbid., 87.24ff. (30-31); 88.1-89.2 (31): “nihil horum scimus, respondetis; ita puto noc- 
turno termpore hec omnia gesta sunt et ideo nemo vidit. Age, fuit in possessione Silvester. 
Quis eum de possessione deiecit? Nam perpetuo in possessione non fuit neque successo- 
rum aliquis, saltem usque ad Gregorium Magnum ... O admirabilem casum! Imperium 
Romanum tantis laboribus, tanto cruore partum tam placide, tam quiete a christianis sac- 
erdotibus vel partum est vel amissum ... et ... per quos hoc gestum sit, quo tempore, quo- 
modo, quandiu prorsus ignotum. Putes in silvis inter arbores regnasse Silvestrum, non 
Rome et inter homines, et ab hibernis imbribus frigoribusque, non ab hominibus 
eiectum.” 


[PDF page 74]
54 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
who lacks another kingdom has absolutely nothing at all? But if therefore it 
is plain that Sylvester did not have possession, in other words that 
Constantine did not hand over possession, there will be no doubt that, as I 
have said, he did not even give the right to possess, unless you assert that the 
right was given but that for some reason possession was not assigned. Thus 
did he clearly give what he realized would not at all come into being? Did he 
give what he could not assign? Did he give what could not pass into the 
hands of the recipients before it ceased to exist? Did he give a gift that would 
not be valid until five hundred years later or never? To talk or think like this 
is lunacy.8° 
4. SECTION I OF THE ORATION AND PARALLEL PASSAGES 
IN VALLA’S WORKS 
The interpretation proposed thus far of section I of the Oration is con- 
firmed by other writings in Valla’s corpus, especially in certain passages 
that to my mind run parallel to it. We shall limit our references to the 
prologue of De libero arbitrio (On the Freedom of the Will) and to the first 
book of the Repastinatio. The comparative reading of these texts will not 
be informed by considerations of compositional chronology — although 
chronological correlations in themselves would contribute to what will be 
said later — but rather by a more detailed study of the gnoseological and 
epistemological modalities of Valla’s rhetorical argument. Valla develops 
this argument along constant themes, themes that in the context of early 
humanism are decisive and original. 
It has already been seen how Valla depicts the conflict between the 
“two kingdoms” (the kingdom of God and the kingdom of Caesar) and 
reduces it in the final analysis to a relationship of reciprocal negation: the 
antinomy between imperium and evangelium. In the prologue to De libero 
arbitrio and in the first book of the Repastinatio, Valla describes, with simi- 
lar concepts although in different terms, another conflict: that between 
the “pagan language” (sermo gentilis) of “philosophy” (philosophia) — the 
language of classical philosophy — and the respublica christiana. Here the 
80 Tbid., g2.8—21 (33): “Non cernitis, si donatio Constantini vera est, Cesari — de Latino 
loquor — nihil relinqui? en qualis imperator, qualis rex Romanus erit, cuius regnum si quis 
habeat nec aliud habeat, omnino nil habeat? Quod si itaque palam est Silvestrum non pos- 
sedisse, hoc est Constantinum non tradidisse possessionem, haud dubium erit ne ius qui- 
dem, ut dixi, dedisse possidendi, nisi dicitis ius quidem datum, sed aliqua causa 
possessionem non traditam. Ita plane dabat, quod minime profuturum intelligebat? dabat, 
quod tradere non poterat? dabat, quod non prius venire in manus eius, cui dabatur, pos- 
sibile erat, quam esset extinctum? dabat donum, quod ante quingentos annos aut nun- 
quam valiturum foret? Verum hoc loqui aut sentire insanum est.” 


[PDF page 75]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 55 
Gospel bars, indeed proscribes, all alien terms, every “foreign tongue” (lin- 
gua peregrina). Indeed, the language of the Christian city would deterio- 
rate in specificity and meaning if philosophical discourse were made use 
of in the theological language of Christianity. In such a case theological 
language would be forced into an impossible marriage; it would be unable 
to discourse in evangelical speech, but rather would have to make due in 
a “barbarian tongue” (lingua barbara) that is devoid of sense and in itself 
“false” (falsa) in the context of the Gospel. Such is the case in the text of 
the Constitutum. It is an ideological statute that has been utilized to intro- 
duce the political language of the “kingdom of Caesar” into the Christian 
polis. As a result the Christian message is expressed there in a “foreign 
language,’ i.e. in a language alien to the Gospel. 
Setting aside metaphors, the situation can also be described historically. 
If the “vicar of Christ” had “also” become the “vicar of Caesar,” the papacy 
would have introduced into the community of believers — and right from 
the first centuries of the diffusion of the new religion — the will to power of 
the “kingdom of Caesar” in place of the Christian message. Thus the evan- 
gelical praxis of Christendom would have transformed into its opposite, 
into the praxis of the power of rule — the power of the Roman Empire. 
Thus Valla identifies an historical and ideological convergence between 
the Constitutum and the advent of scholastic theology. Let us now see how 
he describes that convergence in the first section of the Oration and in 
parallel passages in other works. The assumption of “philosophy” into 
theological discourse (according to De libero arbitrio) had acted as the 
“seedbed” (seminarium) for heresy within Christendom, and the reception 
of the “precepts of philosophy” (praecepta philosophiae), or rather the 
“doctrines of the philosophers” (dogmata philosophorum), had distorted 
evangelical wisdom (“folly”). Similarly, the Constitutum had moved the 
foundation of the Church away from Christ and apostolic praxis and 
toward worldly power and the politics of rule, corrupting the pastoral duty 
of the “vicar of Christ” and of the community of believers. In this way the 
praxis of charity and evangelical freedom was perverted into a rule of 
imperial power that was both political and spiritual. 
Valla sees the Constantinian ecclesiology that emerges from the 
Constitutum, both for its ideological meaning and for the chronology of its 
origins, as an integral part of medieval scholasticism. For Valla, the scho- 
lasticism which began with Boethius flourished in his own day in the form 
of the absolute cultural hegemony of metaphysical and theological 
thought. He considered this thought at length and quite incisively in the 
first book of his Repastinatio. 


[PDF page 76]
56 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
There the “falsifiability” of philosophical language and its illicit assump- 
tion into theological discourse are treated in a particularly rhetorical way. 
This approach consists in a critical (morphological and semantic) analysis 
of the language of “philosophy” for the purpose of demonstrating that the 
logical and ontological categories of Aristotelianism are devoid of any real 
referent, and particularly of the referent which those categories had pre- 
sumed as a given in itself and “substantial.” Those categories, Valla con- 
cludes in the most incisive statements of the first book of the Repastinatio, 
are devoid of meaning in the strongest sense of the word. The same criti- 
cism is repeated, even amplified, with respect to philosophical language 
subsumed into theological discourse. In this case, in fact, Valla not only 
demonstrates that the philosophical categories do not comprehend the 
res (things) that they presume to express, but also, and a fortiori, that these 
same categories cannot comprehend the mystery-res of biblical revela- 
tion, of faith, or of saving grace — of supernatural realities, as the scholas- 
tics would have called them. 
Hence the conflict between philosophy and theology on the one hand 
and the proposal of a functional convergence between rhetoric and theo- 
logical study on the other. Valla expresses this conflict and convergence in 
different ways, but both are based on the same fundamental epistemo- 
logical premises. He consistently sees philosophy as an absurd hand- 
maiden (in the scholastic expression) to theology and as a mistaken 
adhesion to theological discourse. Rhetoric, on the other hand, becomes 
for Valla a tool for analyzing both secular and sacred literature. It is the 
only epistemological methodology compatible with theology, because 
rhetoric is a purely formal instrument (without contents of its own irrec- 
oncilable with biblical faith) and at the same time one abounding in crite- 
ria for the critical analysis of philosophical and theological language.®! 
In the specific case of the Constitutum, Valla stresses how the language 
and political praxis of empire fail to comprehend the fundamental reali- 
ties of civil life; indeed, they destroy the freedom of the respublica as such. 
More importantly, this language and praxis lie at the polar extremes of the 
respublica christiana, a spiritual and religious community based on the 
message of the Gospel. Therefore, neither imperial language nor any other 
civil and political strategy deriving from it can be used by the individual 
81 Camporeale, “Lorenzo Valla tra Medievo e Rinascimento,” 63-82 (= idem, Lorenzo 
Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma, 185-204 and translated in the present volume, 
pp. 212-233); idem, “Lorenzo Valla. Repastinatio,” passim; idem, “Da Lorenzo Valla a 
Tommaso Moro. Lo statuto umanistico della teologia,” Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 4 (1973): 
g-102 (reprinted in idem, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma, 19-119). 


[PDF page 77]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 57 
destined to govern the evangelical Church. The Roman pontiff can be the 
“vicar” of Christ and of him alone, but not “also of the Roman emperor.” 
As a result of his critical analysis of the political and anti-evangelical lan- 
guage of the Constitutum, Valla concludes first the ideological and second 
the historical falseness of the “document of donation.” Its (pseudo)-origins 
simply cannot be found in a time when Christendom was still expanding 
along evangelical lines. Its Christian inauthenticity and the anachronism of 
its origins thus lead Valla to state — and this is the central theme of the 
Oration — that the Constitutum is an ideological and historical imposter 
(falso creditum), flimsily attributed to early Christianity, and a juridico- 
canonical forgery (ementitum). It is a legal counterfeit tailored to the papal 
theocracy of the “Constantinian Church” of medieval Christendom. 
5. THE BODY OF THE ORATION: FROM SECTION III TO SECTION VI 
With the first section of the Oration — together with the second, which is 
an extension of Pope Sylvester’s speech — we have seen how Valla “falsi- 
fies” the Constitutum by demonstrating it to be unsuitable to, indeed 
incompatible with, its ostensible immediate context. Covering the entire 
range of the imperial donation’s supposed context, Valla’s argument 
reveals Constantine’s act to be an inauthentic event in light of the histori- 
cal and ideological dimensions of imperium and evangelium, dimensions 
which are personified in the Oration by Constantine and Pope Sylvester. 
In other words, Valla falsifies the Constitutum by falsifying its referents. 
The imperial power (Constantine) and the papacy (Sylvester) — the refer- 
ents assumed as the real agents of the Constitutum — would have contra- 
dicted (or negated) themselves if the donation had actually occurred. And 
this means that the reference of the “document of donation” is in and of 
itself absurd, and thus not true. Therefore, as the title of the Oration claims, 
the Constitutum is “falsely believed and forged.’8? 
The continuation of Valla’s analysis in sections III, IV, and V is respec- 
tively dedicated to the early church, to the true and proper text of the 
Constitutum, and to the Pactum Hludovicianum (Pact of Louis the Pious). 
These sections seem, in the context of the Oration’s overall structure, to 
constitute its body of the text. This is the part of his discourse in which 
Valla fully elaborates the philological procedure that he pioneered and 
82 On falsification of reference and textuality, see the essential analysis on language in 
Ennio Floris, Sous le Christ, Jésus: méthode danalyse référentielle appliquée aux évangiles 
(Paris: Flammarion, 1987), especially 41-219. 


[PDF page 78]
58 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
that has justifiably made his Oration famous. But this part is also marked 
by a change in argumentation — with respect to the preceding sections — 
that is decisive for understanding the work as a whole. 
Indeed, in the body of the Oration, Valla’s argumentation shifts from 
the context of the Constitutum to its text. The analysis moves to the con- 
tent of the document — to the text of the “document of donation” — and 
subjects it to an enarratio, a form of morphological and semantic criti- 
cism that Valla derived from Quintilian’s Institutio oratoria and fully re- 
elaborated himself. His rhetorical argumentation (as a critical analysis of 
language) therefore takes on a strictly philological character. It neverthe- 
less retains the aim, which is the aim of the whole Oration, of exposing 
the explicit and implicit contradictions in the text of the Constitutum. 
Let us further refine the foregoing considerations on Valla’s argumenta- 
tion and on the way it changes in the transition between sections I and II 
and the body of the Oration. Valla bases his rhetorical strategy, which 
examines the truth and falseness of the relationship between res (things) 
and verba (words) (in this case between the donation and the Constitutum), 
on intertextuality. The change, or new direction, therefore, in argumenta- 
tion travels along the same path as the correlation between text and con- 
text (precisely of intertextuality). Valla believes this correlation to be 
inseparable. In section I (and II) of the Oration Valla had proceeded from 
the context to the text of the Constitutum. Starting from the context of 
imperium and evangelium, that is from the nature and historical phenom- 
enology of each, he had arrived at the text (and an evaluation) of the 
Constitutum and concluded — by induction from the historical reality and 
nature of imperium and evangelium — the logical absurdity of the dona- 
tion and thus its historical unreality. Within these boundaries of inter- 
textuality, Valla’s analysis seems to have proceeded from the “truth” of the 
context — the historical reality and the awareness of imperial power and 
the Christian Gospel — to the “falseness” of the text in consideration. And 
since the context and the text of the Constitutum tured out to be in 
mutual conflict and negation, the supposed reality of the donation was 
revealed as false: it contradicted the effectual (historical) truth of impe- 
rium and the essence of evangelium. 
Valla uses quite a different method of argumentation in the Oration’s 
body. He reverses direction, so to speak, and proceeds from the text of the 
Constitutum to its context. But the context to which Valla refers, it must 
be noted immediately, is not the one presumed by the Constitutum (in the 
intentions of its forger), but rather its authentic historical context, the 
context of its real origins. Thus, Valla proceeds along intertextual lines 


[PDF page 79]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 59 
from the text of the “document of donation,” de-falsified by philological 
analysis, to its authentic context. That authentic context is the historical 
and ideological reality from which the “document of donation” was truly 
born and derived, and to which it thus necessarily belongs. More explic- 
itly, Valla begins the body of the Oration by de-falsifying the text of the 
Constitutum in order to reveal the “Constantinianism” of medieval 
Christendom, that is of the theocratic and imperial ideology of the papacy, 
variously formulated across the centuries from the Decree of Gelasius to 
Boniface VIII’s Unam Sanctam. The effectual context of the Constitutum, 
and thus its more authentic truth, turns out to be the Lateran (/atera- 
nense) ecclesiology of the papal court in Rome.8? 
It is precisely this more authentic truth — both of Constantine’s dona- 
tion and of the “document of donation” — that Valla subjects to historical 
and theological criticism. His intention is to expose the perverted and 
anti-evangelical falseness of both. Therefore he continually emphasizes 
how the Constitutum and the ideology of which it was a product (and of 
which it was also the greatest theoretical expression) both constitute an 
historical collapse of the Gospel and, at the same time, a continuation of 
Roman imperialism, the ultimate example of absolute rule. The 
Constitutum and its ideology instituted the most complete, and also the 
most paradoxical, union of political and religious empire in the world of 
Western Christendom. 
83 The following works should be added to Setz’s ample bibliography: Pietro De Leo, 
Ricerche sui falsi medievali, I. Il Constitutum Constantini. Note e documenti per una nuova 
lettura (Reggio Calabria: Meridionali Riuniti, 1974); Giuseppe Martini, “Traslazione 
dell’Impero e Donazione di Costantino nel pensiero e nella politica d’Innocenzo III,’ 
Nuova Rivista Storica 65 (Jan.-Apr., 1981), fasc. I-II (Scritti di Giuseppe Martini): 3-72; idem, 
“Regale Sacerdotium,” ibid.: 73-156; idem, “Per la storia dei pontificati di Niccolo IV e 
Bonifacio VIII,’ ibid.: 157-190; idem, “Alcune considerazioni sulla dottrina gelasiana,” ibid.: 
282-292, at 291; Walter Ullmann, // papato nel medioevo (Bari: Laterza, 1975), esp. 84ff., 121, 
124, 142 [English ed. = A Short History of the Papacy in the Middle Ages (London: Methuen, 
1972) |; Gerhart B. Ladner, “The Concepts of ‘Ecclesia’ and ‘Christianitas, and their Relation 
to the Idea of ‘Plenitudo Potestatis’ from Gregory VII to Boniface VIII,” in idem, Images and 
Ideas in the Middle Ages. Selected Studies in History and Art, 2 vols. (Roma: Edizioni di storia 
e letteratura, 1983), 487-515; Stanley Chodorow, Christian Political Theory and Church 
Politics in the Mid-Twelfth Century. The Ecclesiology of Gratian’s Decretum (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1972); Michele Maccarrone, “II Papa ‘Vicarius Christi: Testi e 
dottrina dal sec. XII al principio del XIV,” in Miscellanea Pio Paschini: Studi di Storia 
Ecclesiastica, 2 vols. (Roma: Facultas Theologica Pontificii Athenaei Lateranensis, 1958), 
1:427-500; Arsenio Frugoni, Incontri nel Medioevo (Bologna: I] mulino, 1979), 73-177; and 
finally, Pietro De Leo, Gioacchino da Fiore. Aspetti inediti della vita e delle opere (Soveria 
Mannelli: Rubbettino Editore, 1988), 25-50; Giovanni Farris and Benedetto Tino Delfino 
(eds.), Jacopo da Varagine, Atti del 1 Convegno di Studi (Varazze, 13-14 aprile, 1985) 
(Cogoleto: Edizioni SMA, 1987). 


[PDF page 80]
60 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Having specified the modalities and variations of Valla’s procedure 
from sections III to V, we may now take an overall look at the succession 
of these sections that constitute the body of the Oration. It will thus be 
possible to identify and locate Valla’s transitions in argumentation from 
one section to another, to note their connections, and to grasp the partic- 
ular themes of each. The major questions of the body of the Oration will 
then be treated in the following sections of this essay, including Valla’s 
analysis of the Legenda Silvestri (Legend of Sylvester) and of the Pactum 
Hludovicianum (Pact of Louis the Pious). 
Valla conducts his linguistic-semantic analysis of the Constitutum on 
the basis of the distinction between historia (history) and fabula (legend, 
fiction, or myth). In line with this criterion, he attempts to “falsify” the 
donation by means of textual criticism, the intention being to identify 
how much of the Constitutum and its (traditionally) presumed sources is 
historically true and how much fictional. This is the place of section III in 
the course of Valla’s text. 
There Valla indicates which documentary sources he believes to be 
authentic and properly historical. Such sources are almost entirely 
reduced to Eusebius of Caesarea’s Ecclesiastical History (continued by 
Rufinus), which covers the first four centuries of Christianity (from its 
beginning to the post-Nicene period). Valla also accepts as a legitimate 
historical source the De primitiva ecclesia (On the Early Church) of Pope 
Melchiades. From this work he cites the passage reported in Gratian’s 
Decretum (C. XII q. 1 c. 15) concerning Constantine’s donation of the 
Lateran Palace (the imperial seat) to Melchiades and his successors. 
On the basis of these historical documents, and excluding all others, 
Valla defines and appraises the ecclesiastical and institutional dimensions 
of the pre-Constantinian Church. Thus section III is decisive for the body, 
indeed for the entirety, of his Oration. Let us therefore consider this sec- 
tion, here reproduced nearly in full: 
But now it is time ... to administer a mortal blow to my opponents’ case, 
already battered and mangled, and to slice its throat with a single stroke. 
Virtually all history that is worthy of the name reports that Constantine was 
a Christian from childhood together with his father Constantius even well 
before the papacy of Sylvester. So Eusebius, author of an ecclesiastical his- 
tory which Rufinus, a man of considerable erudition, translated into Latin, 
adding two books devoted to his own time. Both of these men were near 
contemporaries of Constantine. Add to this the testimony of a Roman pon- 
tiff who did not merely participate in the course of these events but was in 
charge of them, not as a passive witness but as an active instigator, a narra- 
tor not of someone else’s affairs but of his own. He is Pope Melchiades, who 


[PDF page 81]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 61 
immediately preceded Sylvester, and this is what he says: ‘The Church has 
reached the point when not only peoples but even Roman emperors, who 
held sway over the whole world, might join together in the faith of Christ 
and its sacraments. Of these emperors, Constantine, a highly religious man, 
first openly espoused faith in the truth and made it permissible for those 
who lived anywhere in the world under his rule not only to become 
Christians but to build churches, and he arranged for the assignment of 
properties. Finally the aforementioned emperor provided immense largesse 
and started the construction of the first basilica of the see of St. Peter, so that 
he gave up his own imperial residence and granted it to St. Peter and his suc- 
cessors for their future use’ [Decretum C. XII q. 1 c. 15]. You see that 
Melchiades says Constantine gave nothing except the Lateran palace and 
the properties that Gregory very often mentions in his register. Where are 
those who do not allow us to question the validity of the Donation of 
Constantine, when the actual donation took place before Sylvester and con- 
sisted solely of private properties?®+ 
Section IV is entirely dedicated to a linguistic, morphological, and seman- 
tic analysis of the Constitutum. It is the longest section of the Oration. Here 
are laid down, indeed laid bare, the foundational materials for Valla’s 
treatment of the historical and ecclesiological question of the Donation of 
Constantine. His critical epistemology, together with his philological and 
historical methodology, reveal here the full measure of the original argu- 
mentation that he pioneered. 
Valla proceeds concentrically from a direct and indirect analysis of the 
Constitutum — considering its implicit and explicit sources along with the 
84 Valla, De falso, 93f. (34) and Setz’s notes: “Sed iam tempus est ... cause adversario- 
rum iam concise atque lacerate letale vulnus imprimere et uno eam iugulare ictu. Omnis 
fere historia, que nomen historie meretur, Constantinum a puero cum patre Constantio 
christianum refert multo etiam ante pontificatum Silvestri, ut Eusebius, ecclesiastice 
scriptor historie, quem Rufinus, non in postremis doctus, in Latinum interpretatus duo 
volumina de evo suo adiecit, quorum uterque pene Constantini temporibus fuit. Adde 
huc testimonium etiam Romani pontificis, qui his rebus gerendis non interfuit, sed pre- 
fuit, non testis, sed auctor, non alieni negotii, sed sui narrator. Is est Melchiades papa, qui 
proximus fuit ante Silvestrum, qui ait, ‘Ecclesia ad hoc usque pervenit, ut non solum 
gentes, sed etiam Romani principes, qui totius orbis monarchiam tenebant, ad fidem 
Christi et fidei sacramenta concurrerent. E quibus vir religiosissimus Constantinus pri- 
mus fidem veritatis patenter adeptus licentiam dedit per universum orbem suo degenti- 
bus imperio non solum fieri christianos, sed etiam fabricandi ecclesias, et predia 
constituit tribuenda. Denique idem prefatus princeps donaria immensa contulit et fabri- 
cam templi prime sedis beati Petri instituit, adeo ut sedem imperialem relinqueret et 
beato Petro suisque successoribus profuturam concederet’ En nihil Melchiades a 
Constantino datum ait, nisi palatium Lateranense et predia, de quibus Gregorius in reg- 
istro facit sepissime mentionem. Ubi sunt, qui nos in dubium vocare non sinunt, donatio 
Constantini valeat nec ne, cum illa donatio fuerit et ante Silvestrum et rerum tantum- 
modo privatarum?” 


[PDF page 82]
62 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
document itself — to the individual lexemes of its text. Hence the opening 
passage of the section: 
Although this issue [the Constitutum] is clear and obvious, we must never- 
theless discuss the document itself, which those blockheads keep putting 
forward. First of all, not only must we charge with dishonesty the person 
who wanted to pose as Gratian by making additions to Gratian’s work, but 
we must also charge with ignorance those who think that the text of the 
document was included in Gratian’s collection.®° 
This is the point of departure not only for the section in consideration, but 
also for a kind of analysis that must indubitably be classified as decon- 
structionist literary criticism, to use a “modernist” term of our own day. 
What better analytical tool, what more fitting type of literary criticism 
could Valla have employed to expose a text like the Constitutum as a 
forgery? 
Valla maintains first off that the “text of the grant” (pagina privilegii) 
does not belong to Gratian’s original Concordantia discordantium cano- 
num (Concordance of Discordant Canons). On the contrary, it is a later edi- 
torial addition inserted by another hand (Paucupalea) into the collection 
of canons. There is no trace whatsoever of the “text of the grant” “in any of 
the oldest manuscripts” of Gratian’s Decretum. What is more, its text 
stands in utter contradiction to everything else collected by the renowned 
jurist Gratian, whom Valla describes as “learned in civil law.’ Furthermore: 
... it is highly demeaning to suggest that the compiler of decrees [Gratian] 
either did not know what this man [Paucupalea] added or valued highly and 
considered it authentic.®® 
Actually, Valla maintains, the “text of the grant” was taken from the 
Legenda Silvestri, and it is there that it has its origin. And since the Legenda 
Silvestri is just that — a “legend,” or fabula — the “text of the grant” (pagina 
privilegii, i.e. the Constitutum), as an integral part of that Legenda, is itself 
also a fabula. 
Now, in the received text of the Decretum, and more precisely in the 
brief introduction to the “text of the grant” (Decretum Gratiani, Dist. XCVI 
8° Ibid., 95.1-7 (35): “Que res quanquam plana et aperta sit, tamen de ipso, quod isti 
stolidi proferre solent, privilegio disserendum est. Et ante omnia non modo ille, qui 
Gratianus videri voluit, qui nonnulla ad opus Gratiani adiecit, improbitatis arguendus est, 
verum etiam inscitie, qui opinantur paginam privilegi apud Gratianum contineri ....” 
8° Tbid., 95.8f. (35): “in vetustissimis quibusque editionibus’; 13 (“Gratianus, doctus in 
iure civili” is quoted from the Adnotationes in Novum Testamentum, Rom. 15:29); 96.2—5 
(35): “... indignissimum est credere, que ab hoc adiecta sunt, ea decretorum collectorem 
aut ignorasse aut magnifecisse habuisseque pro veris.” 


[PDF page 83]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 63 
cap. 13), two references are made to it and its tradition: one from the 
Decree of Gelasius, and the other from the Gesta Silvestri (Acts of Sylvester). 
This double reference is supposed to sustain: (1) that the Constitutum 
comes directly from the Gesta Silvestri; (2) that the Gesta Silvestri is 
respected as authentic by the Decree of Gelasius; and (3) that consequently 
the Constitutum must also be respected as an authentic text, since it is said 
(by the Decretum) to be an integral part of the Gesta Silvestri.87 
But, Valla objects, this double reference, brought forth to prove the 
authenticity of the original source (the Gesta Silvestri) from which the 
“text of the grant” is supposed to derive, is belied by its ambiguity. Indeed, 
the Gesta Silvestri to which Gelasius’ Decree refers and to whose existence 
it testifies — together with its liturgical reading current in the Roman 
Church and in others as well — is not to be identified with the Legenda 
Silvestri. The two hagiographic texts are different. While the Gesta does 
not contain the Constitutum, the Legenda does. Valla writes: 
Gelasius testifies that it [the Gesta Silvestri] was read by many Catholics, and 
Voragine mentions it. We too have seen thousands of copies written long ago, 
and they are read out in almost every cathedral on Sylvester's birthday. Yet 
no one says that he has read there what [i.e., the Constitutum] you put in it. 
No one says he has heard of it, or dreamt of it.8° 
So far Valla has made the following points. First, the insertion of the 
Constitutum into Gratian’s Decretum is inauthentic, since it was actually 
added later by a fellow canonist, Paucupalea. Not only is it an editorial 
addition, it is in conflict (almost dysfunctionally so) with the original 
ordering and juridico-canonical systematics of the Concordance as they 
were established and understood by its author. Second, the Constitutum 
does not come from the Gesta Silvestri but from another source or text. 
Valla identifies this other source as the homonymous Legenda. 
As a result of these conclusions and of the Constitutum’s being an 
integral part — indeed the most significant and prominent part — of the 
Legenda Silvestri, Valla is ready to proceed to his own reading and evalua- 
tion of the Legenda. At the same time, he is able to conduct his philologi- 
cal and historical analysis of the Constitutum within the investigation of 
the Legenda. Therefore, ascending and descending along an analytical 
87 Tbid., 95.15ff. (35) and n. 156. 
88 Tbid., 9812-17 (38): “Testatur Gelatius a multis catholicis legi, Voraginensis de eo 
meminit, nos quoque mille et antique scripta exemplaria vidimus, et in omni fere cathedrali 
ecclesia, cum adest Silvestri natalis dies, lectitantur, et tamen nemo se illic legisse istud ait, 
quod tu affingis, nemo audisse, nemo somniasse” (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 84]
64 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
spiral, the humanist proceeds from the “falsification” of the Legenda 
Silvestri to the “falsification” of the Constitutum. These “falsifications” then 
bring him to the “verification” of the historical falseness of the event of 
Constantine’s donation. Then he continues with this process in the oppo- 
site direction. 
This last observation deserves greater consideration. Once again we are 
made to see an additional modality in Valla’s argumentation, a new varia- 
tion characterizing his discourse in section IV. Having pointed out the dif- 
ferences between the Legenda and the Gesta and thus having resolved the 
ambiguity arising from the references in the Decree of Gelasius, Valla turns 
his discourse to the historical and ecclesiological significance of the 
Legenda Silvestri. Then, having identified the Legenda’s historical and 
ecclesiological support for the “document of donation,’ the humanist 
treats the Constitutum itself. This treatment, however, is located within a 
fuller and deeper critical analysis of the entire text of the Legenda Silvestri. 
Valla takes the Legenda to be the founding ideological fabula (myth), the 
primary source, of Constantinian ecclesiology. In other words, the Legenda 
Silvestri is considered to constitute the origins of the “Constantinian 
Church.” It stands in clear contrast — if not in direct and utter antithesis — 
to the historia (history) of the event and of the development of Christianity 
as it is described in the (documentary) narration of Eusebius’ and Rufinus’ 
Ecclesiastical History. 
Hence Valla’s insistence on the ecclesiological and theological inauthen- 
ticity of the Legenda (which includes the Constitutum) and on its falseness 
and impiety in the light of evangelical faith. It is a thaumaturgical tale about 
the divine and about Christian revelation, similar to pagan myths about the 
divine origin of peoples and in full conformity with the “scriptural” tradi- 
tion of the New Testament Apocrypha. Accordingly, Valla writes: 
Look at how great a difference there is between my judgment and yours: Not 
even if the donation were contained in the Gesta Silvestri would I think it 
should be reckoned authentic, since that history is not historia but a poetic 
and very brazen fabula — as I will show later — and no one else of the slightest 
authority makes mention of this donation. Even Jacopo da Voragine, as an 
archbishop enthusiastically inclined towards the clergy, nevertheless in his 
Gesta sanctorum [Acts of the Saints] kept silent about the Donation of 
Constantine as fictitious and unworthy of inclusion among the Gesta 
Silvestri. In a way this was a judgment against those who might have written 
about the matter.89 
89 Tbid., 97.21-98.5 (37): “At videte, quantum inter meum intersit vestrumque iudicium: 
ego ne si hoc quidem apud gesta Silvestri privilegium contineretur pro vero habendum 


[PDF page 85]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 65 
Valla concludes that the Legenda Silvestri and the Constitutum share a 
relationship of what can certainly be called infratextuality. With this term 
we clarify that, for Valla, the Constitutum is not only an integral part of the 
Legenda in the sense that the latter contains the former and is thus its 
original source, but also that the Constitutum gives structure to the text 
and (literary and ideological) meaning of the Legenda. This infratextual 
relationship of the Legenda to the Constitutum, and the corresponding 
structural relationship of the Constitutum to the Legenda, necessarily 
result in the following conclusion: the fictional aspect of the hagiography 
of Sylvester — its evangelical inauthenticity and historical falseness — 
makes the Constitutum equally fictional. 
The “Roman nationalists” of Arnold of Brescia’s revolution had called 
the Constitutum “a lie and an heretical fabula” (mendacium et fabula heret- 
ica, as Wezel reported to Frederick Barbarossa in a letter of 152). Now 
Valla uses the same phrase to characterize the Constitutum, on the grounds 
that the perverted Legenda Silvestri itself is a “very brazen fabula.”®° 
Thus the humanist proceeds from a consideration of the whole literary 
composition of the Legenda to its structural component, the Constitutum. 
Then he continues in the opposite direction from the Constitutum to the 
Legenda, since the latter stands in infratextual relation to the former. For 
Valla, then, the Legenda is the true and specific infratext that governs the 
entire (formal and semantic) textuality of the Constitutum; in the same 
way, the inauthentic text of the Constitutum is the buttress stabilizing the 
historical falseness of the pseudo-Donation of Constantine. 
Following on what has just been said, it is necessary to highlight two of 
Valla’s observations on the Constitutum. Here is the first: 
But this Donation of Constantine, so splendid and so unexampled, can be 
proven by no document at all, whether of gold or on silver or on bronze or 
on marble, or finally, in books, but only, if we believe that man, on paper or 
parchment.?! 
putarem, cum historia illa non historia sit, sed poetica et impudentissima fabula — ut pos- 
terius ostendam — nec quisquam alius alicuius duntaxat auctoritatis de hoc privilegio 
habeat mentionem. Et Iacobus Voraginensis, propensus in amorem clericorum ut archi- 
episcopus, tamen in gestis sanctorum de donatione Constantini ut fabulosa nec digna, que 
inter gesta Silvestri poneretur, silentium egit, lata qaodammodo sententia contra eos, si 
qui hec litteris mandavissent” [translation modified]. 
90 Martini, Traslazione dell’Impero e Donazione di Costantino, 65f. 
91 Valla, De falso, 100.3-7 (39): “Ista vero tam magnifica Constantini et tam inaudita 
donatio nullis, neque in auro neque in argento neque in ere neque in marmore neque 
postremo in libris, probari documentis potest, sed tantum, si isti credimus, in charta sive 
membrana.” 


[PDF page 86]
66 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
The Donation, since it was a fabula, could not be entrusted to a perma- 
nent written form that would withstand time, as had been the practice 
(and still was) with the great documents of the past concerning the his- 
torical, and not “fictitious,” origins of peoples, for example the Mosaic tab- 
lets of the Ten Commandments or the Twelve Tables of Roman law. From 
antiquity on, Valla observes, the statutory provisions of peoples assumed 
a monumental written form in order to provide an everlasting and indeli- 
ble witness to historical reality against the ravages of the elements, “the 
length of time and the violence of fortune.’9? 
Such was not the case with the Donation. The entire history of Sylvester 
is demoted to the status of a “myth” (fabula) and the Constitutum to a 
“charter” (chartula). These most fragile and inconsistent witnesses are 
supposed to testify to the transfer of the “Roman Empire” to the papacy! 
For its part, Valla continues, the Constitutum accrued the most absurd 
title possible: “text of the grant” (pagina privilegii). As a mere “grant” we 
are to understand the “gift of the whole world” (donatio orbis terrarum). 
And a puny “text” is supposed for centuries to have constituted, in the 
tradition of the Roman curia, the statutory basis for the “Constantinian 
Church”!93 
Valla’s second observation, also made in the course of the fourth sec- 
tion, is as follows: 
Some who have been overcome by all arguments are apt to answer me: 
“Why have so many supreme pontiffs believed that this was true?” You are 
my witnesses that you urge me where I would not go, and you force me 
unwillingly to speak ill of supreme pontiffs over whose mistakes I would 
rather draw a veil. But let us continue to speak frankly - since this case cannot 
be conducted in any other way — so that I may admit that they held that belief 
and did so without malice.% 
This passage seems to have been inserted by Valla almost by chance into 
his discourse on the Constitutum, but it is actually essential to the general 
flow of his argument. Indeed, it occurs in the context of his discussion — 
according to the headings glossed in the margin — “on the ignorance of the 
92 Tbid., 101.2 (39): “diuturnitatem temporis et fortune violentiam.” 
8 Tbid., 100.7; 101.12-16 (39): “chartula”; “imperium Romanum’; 17-21 (39): “Paginam 
privilegii”; “privilegium’; 136.1-137.4 (67); 137.1315 (68). 
94 Tbid., 140.17—-141ff. (71-72): “Quidam omnibus defecti rationibus solent mihi respond- 
ere: ‘cur tot summi pontifices donationem hanc veram esse crediderunt?’ Testificor vos, 
me vocatis quo nolo, et invitum me maledicere summis pontificibus cogitis, quos magis in 
delictis suis operire vellem. Sed pergamus ingenue loqui — quandoquidem aliter agi nequit 
hec causa — ut fatear eos ita credidisse et non malitia fecisse” (emphasis added) [transla- 
tion modified]. 


[PDF page 87]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 67 
supreme pontiffs / why the popes believed the donation to be true, if 
indeed they did believe it.”95 
With this passage Valla declares that he cannot continue further in his 
discussion of the “case” in question without respecting or accepting the 
limitations constraining him to “speak frankly, i.e. constraining him to 
narrow the dimensions of his ecclesiological and historical criticism of the 
“Constantinian Church.’ But does such a declaration not actually force the 
reader, for his part, to understand Valla’s criticism in a perspective that 
transcends the direct and explicit attack on the Constitutum? Must the 
reader not hear precisely that which is not said in Valla’s Oration, that 
which is left unexpressed but nevertheless subtly delivered, as if it had 
been made crystal clear? It seems to us that we should respond without a 
doubt in the affirmative. 
Valla was intimately acquainted (let us remember his reference to the 
Historia ecclesiastica) with the historical character that Christianity and 
the “Catholicism” of the Late Empire assumed as a result of the religious 
and political revolution against the official Roman cults (religio). This pro- 
cess developed across the fourth century, from Constantine’s Edict of Milan 
(312) to the assembling of the Codex Theodosianus, begun towards the end 
of the century and completed in the first decades of the following one.°° 
Let us rehearse some of the more significant events between 
Constantine’s victory at the Milvian Bridge in 312 and the death of the 
emperor Theodosius I in 395. The secta catholica (Catholic sect) rises to 
the status of state religion and the Roman cults (religio) are banned. 
Constantine presides over the Council of Nicea in 325 and employs his 
combined imperial authority to halt the trend towards schism and pre- 
serve the unity and uniformity of Christendom. Finally, the “Roman” army 
is defeated at the River Frigidus by the Emperor Theodosius in 394, which 
results in the complete suppression of the Roman Senate. A consequence 
of enormous historical importance is the overthrow of the Roman intelli- 
gentsia and of its leader, the Prefect of the City Symmachus. Roman reli- 
gion and ancestral traditions (mos maiorum) of worship are repressed in 
favor of the absolute hegemony of Catholic Christianity. Most of this was 
the work of Constantine’s successors. 
95 Marginal manuscript headings (Valla, De falso, 141.5/140.19): “de inscitia summorum 
pontificum / cur Pape donationem veram crediderunt, si tamen crediderunt.” 
96 Lidia Storoni Mazzolani, SantAgostino e i pagani (Palermo: Sellerio, 1987), with texts 
from the Codex Theodosianus in the appendix. 


[PDF page 88]
68 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Valla’s criticism in the Oration (beyond the “falsification” of the Legenda 
Silvestri and of the Constitutum) casts suspicion simultaneously on 
Constantine’s anti-republican Caesarism and on the anti-evangelical, 
ecclesiological Caesarism of the papacy. The intention is then to stake the 
claim for political and Christian freedom from and against any kind of 
imperium whatsoever, be it temporal or spiritual. All this is then inscribed 
within a retrospective look at (and connected to a precise historical judg- 
ment of) the reality and historical development of the fourth century. 
This reality and historical truth consist in a break or deviation in the 
Christian tradition involving the stance of the religion and the community 
of believers towards the Gospel. Its salient events are the coming to power 
of Constantine and his successors in Constantinople and the radical trans- 
formation of Christianity from a message of redemption and freedom into 
a religious instrument of power. In this light, Valla’s Oration also becomes 
an historical treatment of the fourth century, critically executed by means 
of philologico-historical analysis. Its extremely negative historical assess- 
ment rejects the coming of the Constantinian and Theodosian Catholic 
Church as the Christian empire of the papacy, born and raised to maturity 
in the fourth century. 
For Valla, the fourth century represents Christianity’s most radical period 
of crisis, marked by a grand anti-evangelical and anti-Christian collapse of 
the Community of Believers in Christ. The Oration as a whole, then, should 
be seen as an anti-Constitutum. It is the complete reversal not only of the 
ecclesiological ideology molded by the Constitutum but also of the histori- 
cal retrospective in which the text of the Donation came to be written. 
Valla knew full well that the Constitutum was no simple fake but rather 
a direct and mature consequence of an historical fact. Its ideological roots 
and Constantinian retrospective are to be found in the transformation of 
the Christian religion that actually occurred over the course of the fourth 
century. Thus Valla’s argumentation necessarily had to shift from the 
scriptural and “diplomatic” inauthenticity of the Constitutum to its more 
radical Christian and evangelical inauthenticity.9” But this further neces- 
sitated arguing against the theoretical basis of the Constitutum, i.e. arriv- 
ing at an historical judgment and criticism of Constantine’s actions and of 
the positive assessment — indeed, the “providential” exaltation — of the 
political and religious revolution effected by the emperor of “Christian 
victory.” Indeed, that positive assessment and religious exaltation first 
97 R.-J. Loenertz, “En marge du Constitutum Constantini. Contribution a Vhistoire du 
texte,” Revue des Sciences Philosophiques et Théologiques 59 (1975): 289-294. 


[PDF page 89]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 69 
created and then buttressed the entire theocratic ideology of the papacy, 
formulated over time and eventually canonized by the Constitutum. 
Valla intends with his Oration, then, to overturn the Constitutum by 
means of the most radical historical criticism of it ever dared. He hopes 
therewith to spark a renaissance of pre-Constantinian Christianity and a 
renewal of the Christian and patristic evangelism that preceded the Edict 
of Milan and the Codex Theodosianus. More generally, the Oration aims to 
restore Christianity to the state it was in before the rise of the Christian- 
Roman Empire of the fourth century. 
Let us now turn to sections V and VI, the sections that conclude the 
body of the Oratio. After having identified (in section III) the texts of 
Eusebius and Rufinus, Pope Melchiades, and Gratian as the documents 
that are historically valid for a critical-philological analysis of the Legenda 
Silvestri and the Constitutum (carried out in section IV), Valla turns in sec- 
tion V to a consideration of the so-called Pactum Hludovicianum, a pact 
drawn up in 817 between the emperor Louis the Pious (814-840) and Pope 
Paschal | (817-824). Valla uses the text of the Pactum as it appears in 
Gratian’s Decretum, Dist. LXIII cap. 30. 
The Pactum Hludovicianum was the first explicit historical confirma- 
tion of the Constitutum, illustrating for the first time the Roman Church’s 
effective use of the document. On account of its historical and canonical, 
ecclesiastical and jurisdictional importance, Gratian included the text of 
the agreement between pope and emperor in his Concordantia discordan- 
tium canonum. And it was as such, on account of its juridical and ecclesio- 
logical significance, that Valla read the Pactum Hludovicianum. 
The Pactum provided a juridical norm and theoretical basis for policy as 
well as for diplomatic relations between the Empire and the papacy. Such 
was the case as much for the papacy’s political and ecclesiological praxis 
in the past as for the canonistic and scholastic ecclesiology contemporary 
with Valla. It is precisely in consideration of these political and ecclesio- 
logical premises, brought to light by the Pactum, that Valla conducts his 
critical analysis in section V. And again, in accordance with the modes and 
objectives of his peculiar argumentative procedure, he attempts to iden- 
tify and highlight the internal contradictions that invalidate both the 
Pactum’s juridical validity in civil and canon law and its use in governing 
relations between pope and emperor. 
The section’s opening passage is indicative of Valla’s argumentative cri- 
teria, as well as of his tone (sharp irony), in this section of the Oration: 
Louis, are you really making an agreement with Paschal? If all this belongs to 
you, in other words the Roman empire, why are you granting it to someone 


[PDF page 90]
70 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
else? If it belongs to Paschal and is his possession, what is the point of the 
confirmation? How much Roman empire will you have left, if you lose the 
capital itself? The Roman emperor is so called from the name of Rome. Tell 
me, is everything else you possess yours or Paschal’s? Yours, I suppose you 
will say: therefore the Donation of Constantine is invalid if you are the 
owner of what he gave the pontiff. If it is valid, by what right does Paschal 
turn all the rest over to you after retaining for himself only what he already 
possesses? What is the sense of such largesse involving the Roman empire, 
either yours to him or his to you? You therefore rightly speak of an agree- 
ment as if it were a kind of collusion.9° 
In section V — together with section VI, its continuation — Valla does not 
change his style of argumentation, at least in the sense that he sticks to the 
fundamental modality of his critical analysis. Nevertheless, in these two 
final sections of the body he seems to turn his discourse — with a direct 
comparison and extremely explicit language — more towards the canonis- 
tic and scholastic ecclesiology of his own day. Valla aims his criticism spe- 
cifically at the “Constantinian” rule and corresponding praxis (based on 
the Constitutum) of the contemporary papacy, still in full force in the fif- 
teenth century with Pope Eugenius IV, the actual addressee of the Oration. 
Hence, again, Valla’s fully articulated response in section VI (the last 
before the peroration) to the final objection of those who would defend 
the Constitutum on the basis of the right of prescription:99 
Our adversaries, who have been kept from defending a donation that never 
was and, even if it had been, would have collapsed over the course of time, 
resort to another form of defense, and, as if they had retreated from their 
city, gather themselves into the citadel, which they are compelled to surren- 
der just as soon as the food runs out. “The Roman church,” they say, “has 
exercised its authority in those territories it possesses.”10° 
98 Valla, De falso, 156.16-157.7 (82): “Tu ne, Ludovice, cum Pascale pacisceris? Si tua, 
idest imperii Romani sunt ista, cur alteri concedis? si ipsius et ab eo possidentur, quid 
attinet te illa confirmare? Quantulum etiam ex imperio Romano tuum erit, si caput ipsum 
imperii amisisti? A Roma dicitur Romanus imperator. Quid, cetera que possides, tua ne an 
Pascalis sunt? Credo, tua dices: nihil ergo valet donatio Constantini, si ab eo pontifici 
donata tu possides, Si valet, quo iure Pascalis tibi cetera remittit retentis tantum sibi que 
possidet? Quid sibi vult tanta aut tua in illum aut illius in te de imperio Romano largitio? 
Merito igitur pactwm appellas quasi quandam collusionem.” 
99 [In Roman law, the right of prescription (onge possessionis prescriptio) is a right to 
property that one does not technically own based on authority over that property over a 
long and established period of time. Eds.] 
100 Valla, De falso, 167.5ff. (go): “Exclusi a defendenda donatione adversarii — quod 
nec unquam fuit et, si qua fuisset, iam temporum condicione intercidisset — confugiunt 
ad alterum genus defensionis, et velut relicta urbe in arcem se recipiunt, quam statim 
cet cibariis dedere cogerunt: ‘prescriptsit, inquiunt, ‘Romana ecclesia in iis que 
possidet ....” 


[PDF page 91]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 71 
Thus section VI concludes the body of the Oration by denying the papacy’s 
ability, on the basis of the Constitutum, to appeal to the right of prescrip- 
tion in defense of powers supposedly devolving to the Roman Church 
from the pseudo-Donation of Constantine. 
This last consideration on section VI still concerns only its formal 
aspect and structural placement in the Oration’s literary composition. Let 
us remember, however, that Valla’s writing has its motivations and origin 
in an assault, against the papacy in general and Eugenius IV in particular, 
in defense of the Aragonese succession to the Kingdom of Naples, and that 
it is thus an issue of Alfonso the Great’s chancery. From this point of view, 
section VI enjoys a nearly absolute preeminence, whether it is considered 
in and of itself or viewed within the scope of a decidedly relativistic inter- 
pretation of the Oration (a type of interpretation, by the way, that would 
be more than legitimate). 
Indeed, the Oration was born, drafted, and developed in a complex 
articulation of theoretical and historical arguments. It is a political, juridi- 
cal, and canonistic discourse aimed at radically criticizing contemporary 
papal power (potestas papalis), especially as that power was manifested in 
the political and ecclesiological praxis of Pope Eugenius IV. Valla is quite 
explicit about all this right in section VI, which constitutes the final and 
definitive conclusion of his whole discourse. Therefore, this section 
becomes a paradigmatic and formal expression of his chief intention, and 
thus of the primary and determining purpose of the Oration as a whole. 
Here are Valla’s most significant and prominent statements: 
‘The Roman church has exercised its authority’ [Codex 7, 33-35]: Why, there- 
fore, is it so often concerned that this right be confirmed by the emperors? 
Why does it boast of the donation and the imperial confirmation, if just one 
of these would suffice? ... How can it have done this, when it is based on no 
title but only on possession in bad faith? If you deny possession in bad faith, 
you certainly cannot deny in stupid faith. Or, in a matter so great and so 
conspicuous, ought ignorance of fact and law to be excused? Fact — because 
Constantine did not give Rome and the provinces: an ordinary person might 
be unaware of this but not the supreme pontiff. Law — because those places 
could not have been given or accepted: one could scarcely be a Christian 
and not know this. Will stupid credulity give you a right to what would never 
have been yours, had you been more prudent? Now at least, after I have 
demonstrated that you had possession through ignorance and stupidity, will 
you not forfeit that right, if you ever had it? ... But if you persist in keeping 
possession, your ignorance is straightaway transformed into malice and 
deceit, and you plainly become a possessor in bad faith. 
‘The Roman church has exercised its authority’: You transfer to man an 
authority that is exercised over mute and mindless objects. The longer a 


[PDF page 92]
72 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
man is kept in slavery, the more detestable it is. Birds and wild animals do 
not want to be subject to authority, but however long they have been con- 
fined, as soon as the occasion presents itself, they escape as they like. Will a 
man, when possessed by a man, not be free to escape? ... But the Pope, as 
may be observed, assiduously plots against the liberty of peoples. Therefore, 
as the occasion arises, they rebel in turn every day — look at Bologna recently. 
If any of them ever voluntarily consented to papal rule — which can happen 
when some danger is threatening from another quarter, it must not be imag- 
ined that they consented to make themselves slaves, that they could never 
pull their necks out from under the yoke, that afterwards they and their off- 
spring would have no jurisdiction over themselves. This would be foully 
unjust. Voluntarily, supreme pontiff, we came to you to govern us: volun- 
tarily we now go away from you, lest you govern us any longer .... As for you, 
look after your sacral duties. Do not enthrone yourself in the North and 
thunder from there as you hurl bolts of lightning against [the Roman] peo- 
ple and all others.!! 
The preceding excursus has served as an overview of sections III, IV, V, and 
VI of the Oration. The following pages will be dedicated to highlighting 
certain aspects and nodal points that are essential for fully comprehend- 
ing Valla’s investigation into and meditation on the Constitutum’s pseudo- 
donation. The following essential aspects and themes will be treated: 
(1) Valla’s philological study of the Constitutum within the context of 
101 Tbid., 167.14-16 (91); 167.20-168.15 (92); 169.713 (94); 170.18-171.9 (94); 172.11ff. (95): 
“Prescripsit Romana ecclesia’: cur ergo ab imperatoribus totiens curat sibi ius confirman- 
dum? cur donationem confirmationemque Cesarum iactat, si hoc unum satis est? ... Et 
quomodo potest prescripsisse, ubi de nullo titulo, sed de male fidei possessione constat? 
Aut si male fidei possessionem neges, profecto stulte fidei negare non possis. An in tanta re 
tamque aperta excusata debet esse et facti et iuris ignorantia? facti quidem, quod Romam 
provinciasque non dedit Constantinus — quod ignorare idiote hominis est, non summi 
pontificis —, juris autem, quod illa nec donari potuere nec accipi — quod nescire vix chris- 
tiani est. Ita ne stulta credulitas dabit tibi ius in iis, que, si prudentior fores, tua nunquam 
fuissent? Quid, nonne nunc saltem, postquam te per ignorantiam atque stultitiam posse- 
disse docui, ius istud, si quod erat, amittes? ... Quod si adhuc possidere pergis, iam inscitia 
in malitiam fraudemque conversa est planeque effectus es male fidei possessor. 
‘Prescripsit Romana ecclesia’: ... Prescriptionem, que fit de rebus mutis atque irratio- 
nabilibus, ad hominem transfers, cuius quo diuturnior in servitute possessio eo est detest- 
abilior. Aves ac fere in se prescribi nolunt, sed quantolibet tempore possesse, cum libuerit 
et oblata fuerit occasio, abeunt: homini ab homine possesso abire non licebit? ... At papa, 
ut videre licet, insidiatur sedulo libertati populorum. Ideoque vicissim illi quotidie oblata 
facultate — ad Bononiam modo respice — rebellant. Qui si quando sponte — quod evenire 
potest aliquo aliunde periculo urgente — in papale imperium consenserunt, non ita accipi- 
endum est consensisse, ut servos se facerent, ut nunquam subtrahere a iugo colla possent, 
ut postea nati non et ipsi arbitrium sui habeant, nam hoc iniquissimum foret. Sponte ad te, 
summe pontifex, ut nos gubernares, venimus: sponte nunc rursus abs te, ne gubernes diu- 
tius, recedimus .... Tu vero, que sacerdotii operis sunt, cura, et noli tibi ponere sedem ad 
aquilonem et illinc tonantem fulgurantia fulmina in hunc populum ceterosque vibrare” 
[translation modified]. 


[PDF page 93]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 73 
the Legenda Silvestri; (2) Valla’s anti-Caesarism/radical republicanism and 
his historical and theological criticism of Augustine’s City of God; and 
(3) Valla’s defense of the Oration to the Roman curia. 
6. SECTION IV: FROM THE CONSTITUTUM CONSTANTINI 
TO THE LEGENDA SILVESTRI 
From a formal point of view, the method adopted by Valla in section IV is 
an enarratio: a study of the Constitutum’s textuality and infratextuality by 
means of morphological, syntactic, and semantic analysis. Valla uses the 
interpretive procedure of the enarratio, however, in his own particular 
fashion, arriving at the study of the Constitutum’s grammar by way of the 
document’s literary textuality/infratextuality. In a similar way, Valla con- 
cludes the non-correspondence between the “text of the grant” and the 
language which that “text” presumes as contemporaneous with itself. The 
language of the “text” is considered in two different ways: on the one hand 
as language in the sense of a spoken tongue (lingua), i.e. as a system of 
verbal signs, and on the other as language in the sense of linguistic usage 
(linguaggio), i.e. as a system of meanings and conceptual categories. 
The Constitutum, in other words, is shown not only to be meaningless 
in itself, but clearly also, on a deeper level of analysis, to bear witness to its 
own falseness, once it is examined by methods aimed at identifying the 
reference it presumes as contemporaneous with itself. Ultimately, the 
Constitutum is betrayed as the work of a forger — no matter how it is ana- 
lyzed and compared — by the language and linguistic usage of the Latinity 
and/or Christianity in which it contextualizes itself. Thus Valla highlights 
the linguistic and semantic inconsistencies of the “text of the grant.’ 
Similarly, and as always in virtue of his historical and philological criti- 
cism, he also unmasks its ideological contradictions, on both a political 
and a theological (particularly an ecclesiological) level. 
The Constitutum’s anachronism and falseness — betrayed by its own 
“text” (the diplomatic edition) and “wording” — thus lead Valla to relocate 
it within historical and doctrinal dimensions that are, actually and legally, 
entirely different from the ones presumed by the “document of donation.” 
Indeed, these dimensions are far removed and distinct from the times and 
spaces of the original, evangelical Christianity of the earliest centuries. 
More particularly, to Valla’s retrospective view the wide divergence 
between verba (words, i.e. the elements composing the text of the 
Constitutum) and res (things, i.e. the definitely anachronistic referents 


[PDF page 94]
74 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
of the text) makes manifest the natures of Constantinian and pre- 
Constantinian Christianity, as well as the historico-ideological distance 
between them. Ultimately, we are speaking of a profound divergence 
between modern (medieval and scholastic) and ancient ecclesiology, to 
use a terminology of binary opposition (moderna/antiqua) typical of 
Valla.°2 Indeed, we must add immediately — and in part to justify fur- 
ther the interpretation of the Oration proposed here — that the point of 
bifurcation (as seen by Valla) between pre-Constantinian (antiqua) and 
Constantinian (moderna) ecclesiology is the fundamental premise of the 
entire Oration, and thus of its criticism of contemporary canon law and 
theology. At the center of this controversy is the meaning of the formula- 
tion, “the pope is the vicar of Christ” (papa, vicarius Christi). 
It is known that the pope’s status as Christ’s vicar had been the premise 
and the point of departure for scholastic and modern ecclesiology. By way 
of a full and sophisticated reformulation on the part of scholastic theoriz- 
ers of canon law, that assertion — “the pope is the vicar of Christ’ — had 
become the final conclusion of the papacy (as the “vicariate of Christ”), as 
well as a package description for a host of secondary attributes encom- 
passed by the formula. Since the pope was the vicar of Christ, he was also 
the “high priest” (swmmus sacerdos), the “successor of Peter” (successor 
Petri), and the “Bishop of Rome” (Romanus pontifex), 
to whom all kings of the Christian people must be subjects, just as to the lord 
Jesus Christ himself .... Accordingly, divine providence miraculously saw to 
it that in the city of Rome, which God had prophesied would become the 
capital of the Christian people, the custom slowly took root that the leaders 
of the cities were subject to the priests.10% 
Valla accepts the statement, “the pope is the vicar of Christ,” as a point 
of departure and a first premise for his criticism, and he recognizes it as 
102 Camporeale, “Lorenzo Valla tra Medioevo e Rinascimento,” 36-37 [= Camporeale, 
Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma, 157-159, and translated in the present 
volume, 182-184]. 
103 Maccarrone, “II Papa ‘Vicarius Christi’” passim, together with his Vicarius Christi. 
Storia del titolo papale (Roma: Facultas Theologica Pontificii Athenaei Lateranensis, 1952). 
For this passage, quoted from the De regimine principum, 1.15 (“summus sacerdos, successor 
Petri, Romanus pontifex, cui omnes reges populi Christiani oportet esse subditos, sicut ipsi 
Domino Iesu Christo .... Propter quod mirabiliter ex divina providentia factum est ut in 
Romana urbe, quam Deus praeviderat Christiani populi principalem sedem futuram, hic mos 
paulatim inolesceret ut civitatum rectores sacerdotibus subiacerent.”), see Kurt Flasch, Das 
philosophische Denken im Mittelalter. Von Augustin zu Machiavelli (Stuttgart: Reclam, 1986), 
333; Charles Till Davis, Dante’s Italy and other Essays (Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, 1984), 254-289: “Ptolemy of Lucca and the Roman Republic,” esp. 273— 
278. See also idem, Dante and the Idea of Rome (Oxford: Clarendon, 1957), 1-39 and passim. 


[PDF page 95]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 75 
completely valid. But, one step at a time, he ends up arguing against the 
whole of scholastic ecclesiology, which is based on the same premise. 
The papacy’s ecclesiological attributes are said to be inconsistent with the 
premise (“the pope is the vicar of Christ”) from which they were derived. 
Some are even judged to be in clear contradiction — from a strictly evan- 
gelical point of view — with the very nature of the papacy, insofar as it is 
the primary apostolic see of the “other Christ” (alter Christus) on earth. It 
might be noted, by way of digression, that Valla’s writings often show 
affinities with the evangelical ecclesiology of Wycliffe and Hus. 
Valla reaches his ecclesiological conclusions in the following way. First 
he reduces every religious title (“high priest, successor of Peter, Bishop of 
Rome, to whom all kings ...”) that with the passage of time was tacked 
onto the syntagma “the pope is the vicar of Christ,” or which was devel- 
oped on the basis of that syntagma, to the one authentic attribute of the 
bishopric of Rome, the one on account of which the papacy exists, always 
and only, as the “vicariate of Christ.” Then he reinterprets and reconfirms 
the statement “the pope is the vicar of Christ” in a strictly evangelical 
sense: the pope, since he has the preeminent claim to apostolic succes- 
sion, is the perfect personification of the christianus homo, and thus he is 
always (and only) the “vicar of Christ” par excellence. 
Once again, it may be observed that in the Oration Valla follows the 
very same argumentative procedures with respect to the ecclesiological 
language of scholasticism as he does in the Repastinatio with respect to 
scholasticism’s philosophical and theological language. In the first book of 
the Repastinatio, Valla uses philological, morphological, and semantic 
analysis in a two-step operation. First, he reduces the transcendentals (for 
example) to the single concept of res (thing), or the predicaments (another 
example) to the category of qualitas-actio (quality-act). Then he reinter- 
prets those basic terms to which the theoretical language had been 
reduced by charging them with new meanings.!°4 Here, in the Oration, 
Valla follows the same procedure and repeats the same operation. First he 
reduces the multiple ecclesiological attributes of the papacy developed by 
scholastics and canonists to one fundamental affirmation: “the pope is the 
vicar of Christ.” Then he reinterprets that affirmation according to a mean- 
ing that it could have in the light either of the New Testament scriptures 
(restricted to the evangelical books) or of a spiritual and reforming tradi- 
tion, which had often emerged in Christianity’s history in the form of 
radical evangelism. 
104 Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 153-171. 


[PDF page 96]
76 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Let us now see exactly how and in what sense Valla executes in 
section IV his critique of the ecclesiological language of medieval and con- 
temporary scholasticism and canon law. He begins his philological and his- 
torical critique with the Constitutum — the “text of the grant” or “document 
of donation’ — and finishes with the Legenda Silvestri taken as a whole, that 
is as the comprehensive whole of the Constitutum. It should be added 
that Valla develops his analysis, both of the Constitutum and of the Legenda, 
at various levels. These are pursued distinctly one after another, but they 
are always correlated within the individual texts under consideration. 
61. The Constitutum 
Valla first uses his grammatical study to reveal the “barbarity of language” 
(loquendi or sermonis barbaries) typical of the “document of donation.” He 
conducts this study on the text of the Constitutum by subjecting it to a 
linguistic analysis based on fourth-century Latin, the language that the 
“document” has as a referent and in which it most often presumes to 
express itself.105 
According to Valla, the linguistic analysis of the Constitutum reveals 
inelegant and often inexact syntactical structures: 
He is so enchanted by the sound of turgid vocabulary that he repeats the 
same things and regurgitates what he has already said .... A fine reason to 
speak like a barbarian, to make your utterance go more prettily, as if any- 
thing pretty could be found in such coarseness.10& 
The composer (or forger) of the Constitutum is revealed as “endowed with 
no literary taste.” He is unworthy of being the “scribe of the Caesars,” and 
he is far, far from the eloquence of a Lactantius, whom he pretends to have 
as both his contemporary and his model.!°” There is therefore a difference 
between the Latinity of the Constitutum and the neo-classical Latinity of 
the fourth century, the Latin used by Constantine and Lactantius: 
105 Camporeale, “Lorenzo Valla. Repastinatio,” 230ff.; Vincenzo De Caprio, “La rinascita 
della cultura a Roma: la tradizione latina nelle Eleganze di Lorenzo Valla,’ in Umanesimo a 
Roma nel Quattrocento, ed. Paolo Brezzi and Maristella De Panizza Lorch (Roma: Istituto di 
Studi Romani, 1984), 163-194; idem, “Appunti sul classicismo delle Eleganze di Lorenzo 
Valla,’ Annali della Facolta di Lettere e Filosofia, Istituto di filologia moderna, Universita di 
Roma 1:2 (1981): 59-80. 
106 Valla, De falso, 106.1-3, 7-9 (43): “... ita verborum turgentium strepitu delectatur, ut 
eadem repetat et inculcet, que modo dixerat; ... honesta ratio barbare loqui, ut venustius 
currat oratio, si modo quid in tanta scabritia venustum esse potest.” 
107 Tbid., 12.8 (48): “nulla litteratura preditus”; 106.5 (43): “Cesarum scribe”; 107.4 (43); 
117.15 (51). 


[PDF page 97]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE Fa]. 
Who ever heard of a ‘Phrygian tiara’ in Latin? Although you talk like a bar- 
barian, you apparently want me to think this is the language of Constantine 
or Lactantius. In his play Menaechmi [426], Plautus used the word phrygio 
for a clothesmaker, and Pliny [Nat. hist. VIII 106] calls embroidered gar- 
ments ‘phrygions’ because the Phrygians invented them. But what would a 
‘Phrygian tiara’ signify?!08 
And again, 
A style worthy of Constantine, an eloquence worthy of Lactantius, not only 
in other places but also in that phrase ‘be mounted on mounts’! ... May God 
destroy you, wickedest of mortals, for ascribing barbarous speech to an age 
of learning.!°9 
Still using the criterion of Latinity (and with particular reference to fourth- 
century Latinity), Valla continues on to the morphological, semantic, and 
pragmatic analysis of the lemmas and syntagmas of the whole Constitutum: 
Should I attack the foolishness of ideas more than words? You have heard 
about the ideas. Here is the foolishness of words.° 
He devotes the rest of section IV to this analysis in order to leave no doubt 
that the Constitutum lies outside of Constantine’s historical context.! 
As linguistic analysis shows the Constitutum to be contrary to proper 
Latinity, thus an analysis of the Christian religion based on the New 
Testament shows it to be contrary to the evangelical ecclesia. The 
Constitutum makes the claim, which it even reaffirms in several ways, that 
as a result of the Donation of Constantine the Romans became “a people 
subject to the nile of the Church of Rome.””” But this is “unheard-of,” pro- 
tests Valla. How could an imperial decree, in only “three days,” obliterate 
that Romanitas (Romanness) — consisting of civil and political autonomy 
and the governance of other peoples on the basis of law — which was under- 
stood as the special historical destiny of Rome and of the Roman people? 
108 Jbid., 117.13-118.4 (51): “... quis unquam ‘phrygium latine dici audivit? Tu mihi, dum 
barbare loqueris, videri vis Constantini aut Lactantii esse sermonem? Plautus in Menechmis 
‘phrygionem’ pro concinnatore vestium posuit, Plinius ‘phrygionas’ appellat vestes acu 
pictas, quod earum Phryges fuerint inventores: ‘phrygium’ vero quid significet?” 
109 [bid., 124.16f. (56), 120.20ff. (53): “... dignus Constantino sermo, digna Lactantio fac- 
undia cum in ceteris tum vero in illo ‘equos equitent’ .... Deus te perdat, improbissime 
mortalium, qui sermonem barbarum attribuis seculo erudito.” 
0 Jbid., 123.12ff. (55): “utrum magis insequar sententiarum an verborum stoliditatem? 
Sententiarum audistis, verborum hec est” (emphasis added). 
11 The most important passages are ibid., 123-125 (55-56), 126f. (57), 129-133 (61-64), 
138f. (70), 143 (73): 2 Jbid., 102.13ff. (42): “populo imperio Romane ecclesie subiacenti.” 


[PDF page 98]
78 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
What people is this? The Roman people? Why not say ‘Roman people’ rather 
than ‘subject people’? What is this new insult to the Quirites, whom the best 
of poets eulogized: ‘You, Roman, take care to rule over peoples with your 
imperial power’ [Virgil, Aeneid 6.851]. So the people that rules over other 
peoples is itself called a subject people. This is unheard of. For, as Gregory 
attests in many of his letters, the Roman emperor differs from all other rulers 
in this particular point: he alone is the leader of a free people. But even if 
what you claim be granted, are not other peoples also subject? Or do you 
also have other people in mind? How could it happen in three days that all 
peoples subject to the rule of the Church of Rome were on hand for that 
decree?#!8 
As a result of the donation — Valla notes again — the papacy would have 
risen to the absolute and total imperium of the Roman Empire. The Roman 
pope would have been invested by Constantine with its power and abso- 
lute rule, which would now have a “priestly” nature to boot. What is more, 
the neo-Christian emperor — whom Valla deprecates as “made to take over 
epithets of God and to effect an imitation of the language of Sacred 
Scripture, which he had never read”"* — would have converted the pope 
from the “successor of Peter” to the “vicar of Peter.” Pope Sylvester would 
thus appear to have been called to the primacy of the Roman see by the 
will and deliberation of the emperor Constantine: 
He calls the Roman pontiffs ‘vicars of Peter, as if Peter is still alive or all the 
others are of lesser eminence than Peter was.... Although the Roman see 
received its primacy from Christ, and the Eighth Synod [Constantinople, 
869/70] declared it, according to Gratian and many of the Greeks, it is said 
[in the Constitutum] to have received this from Constantine, who was barely 
a Christian, as if from Christ .... ‘In honor of blessed Peter; as if Christ were 
not the most important cornerstone on which the temple of the Church has 
been built, but Peter .... He not only makes Constantine similar in office to 
Moses, who adorned the High Priest on the order of God, but he makes him 
an expounder of secret mysteries — something extremely difficult even for 
those who have long been immersed in sacred texts. Why did you not also 
make Constantine the chief pontiff, as indeed many emperors were, so that 
U3" Tbid., 104.19-105.5 (42) (and Setz’s note 191): “Et quis iste est populus, Romanus ne? At 
cur non dicitur ‘populus Romanus’ potius quam ‘populus subiacens’? Que nova ista contu- 
melia est in Quirites? de quibus optimi poete elogium est: ‘Tu regere imperio populos, 
Romane, memento, Qui regit alios populos, ipse vocatur ‘populus subiacens, quod inaudi- 
tum est. Nam in hoe, ut in multis epistolis Gregorius testatur, differt Romanus princeps a 
ceteris, quod solus est princeps liberi populi. Ceterum ita sit ut tu vis: nonne et alii populi 
subiacent? an alios quoque significas? Quomodo fieri istud triduo poterat, ut omnes populi 
subiacentes imperio Romane ecclesie illi decreto adessent?” 
14 Tbid., 107.12-14 (43): “titulos Dei sibi arrogare fingitur ... et imitari velle sermonem 
sacre scripture, quem nunquam legerat.” 


[PDF page 99]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 79 
his decorations might be more conveniently transferred to another supreme 
pontiff? But you knew no history. 
According to the Constitutum, Constantine had also given to the pope the 
imperial insignia and vestments belonging to the Caesars. Thus, 
Constantine's investiture of the pope with Roman imperium over the 
church of believers is described by the Constitutum as a ritual transmis- 
sion of signa and vestimenta from the emperor to the vicar of Christ. Valla 
dwells thoughtfully on this extensive passage of the Constitutum (which 
he quotes in its entirety) describing the emperor's investiture of the pope. 
Among other things he observes: 
You Roman pontiffs, ... will the vestments, the appurtenances, the pomp, 
the horses, in short the lifestyle of an emperor thus befit the vicar of Christ? 
What does a priest have to do with an emperor? ... The wickedest of men 
fail to understand that Sylvester ought rather to have put on the garments 
of Aaron, who was God’s highest priest, than the vestments of a pagan 
ruler.46 
Then, with a subtle interlacing of linguistic criticism, biblical exegesis, 
irony, and bitter sarcasm towards the imperial investiture of the vicar of 
Him who had suffered a similar ritual as the joke of a Roman cohort, Valla 
considers the Constitutum’s statement, “To the blessed Sylvester, his 
[Peter’s] vicar ... we hand over ... as well ‘the purple cloak and ‘the scarlet 
tunic’ and all imperial vestments.”"” He points out first of all — together 
with other glosses on morphology and semantics — that the forger of the 
“document of donation” is unaware that the two expressions (in italics 
NS Tbid., 106.12ff (43), 108.u-14 (44), 126.18-20 (57), 128.15-129.3 (60): “Et pontifices 
Romanos appellat ‘vicarios Petri, quasi vel vivat Petrus vel minori dignitate sint ceteri, 
quam Petrus fuit .... quod cum a Christo primatum acceperit Romana sedes et id Gratiano 
testante multisque Grecorum octava synodus declararit, accepisse dicatur a Constantino 
vixdum christiano tanquam a Christo .... ‘Pro honore beati Petri? quasi Christus non sit 
summus angularis lapis, in quo templum ecclesie constructum est, sed Petrus .... 
Constantinum non tantum officio similem Moysi, qui sammum sacerdotem iussu Dei 
ornavit, sed secreta mysteria facit exponentem, quod difficillimum est iis, qui diu in sacris 
litteris sunt versati. Cur non fecisti etiam Constantinum pontificem maximum — ut multi 
imperatores fuerunt —, ut commodius ipsius ornamenta in alteram summum pontificem 
transferrentur? Sed nescisti historias.” 
U6 Jbid., 115.15-16.1, 16.3-5 (49): “O Romani pontifices ... ita ne vestimenta, apparatus, 
pompa, equitatus, omnis denique vita Cesaris vicarium Christi decebit? Que communica- 
tio sacerdotis ad Cesarem! ... Sceleratissimi homines non intelligunt Silvestro magis vestes 
Aaron, qui summus Dei sacerdos fuerat, quam gentilis principis fuisse sumendas.’ 
7 Jbid., 14.4-9 (49): “beato Silvestro, eius vicario ... tradimus ... verum etiam ‘chlamy- 
dem purpuream’ atque ‘tunicam coccineam’ et omnia imperialia indumenta ...” (emphasis 
added). 


[PDF page 100]
80 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
above) have the same meaning, and thus that his repetition of them 
results in banal pleonasm. However, Valla continues ironically, maybe the 
forger wanted to conflate in his composition, as if to endow it with a 
devout scriptural resonance, the texts of Matthew 27:28 and John 19:2, 
where the two evangelists describe the burlesque regalia placed upon 
Christ by the Roman soldiery."® But it is precisely these perverted scrip- 
tural resonances, it is this treacherous and faithless language employed by 
the forger in the Constitutum — “the barbarous language of this most mon- 
strous of men” (improbissimi mortalium sermo barbarus) — that amplifies 
the sharp dissonance between the “document of donation” and the Gospel 
and the Christian community: 
Would that very modest emperor [Constantine] have been willing to say 
this, and that very pious pontiff [Sylvester] to hear it? ... What is more idiotic 
than to say that all the emperor's vestments are appropriate for a pontiff? ... 
There is nothing emptier, nothing more inappropriate for a Roman pontiff 
than this." 
To repeat, according to the Constitutum the imperial investiture effected 
by Constantine involves the pope directly and immediately. Indeed, the 
pope is the successor of Peter who presided over the Roman see, and as 
such he is first and foremost the vicar of Peter, even before being the vicar 
of Christ. Yet the imperial investiture is not limited to the pope or to his 
person but is extended to the entire Roman “clergy.” This is said explicitly 
in the Constitutum, and it is particularly emphasized during the descrip- 
tion of the ceremonial for imperial investiture. Valla, who penetrates to 
the deepest level of meaning of this ceremonial, glosses the text thus: “But 
how great is your generosity, Emperor, who are not content to have 
adorned the pontiff without adorning the entire clergy as well.”!2° 
But if Constantine confers the imperial insignia and vestments on all 
members of the Roman clergy (“bestowing ‘the decorations of a general’ 
on clerics as a whole”), he places them at the highest grade of political and 
civil status in Rome (“they are made patricians and consuls”). He gives 
them a place at the “pinnacle of exceptional authority and prominence.” 
He elevates the Roman pope and his curia both to the supreme hierarchy 
U8 Tbid., 18-20 (52). 
9 Tbid., 108.14f. (44); 119.15-120.1 (52); 121.10f. (53): “Hoc ille modestissimus princeps 
dicere, hoc piissimus pontifex audire voluisset? ... Quid stultius quam omnia Cesaris indu- 
menta dicere convenire pontifici? ... Nihil est vanius nihilque a pontifice Romano 
alienius.” 
120 Tbid., 121.17f. (54): “verum quanta est munificentia tua, imperator, qui non satis 
habes ornasse pontificem, nisi ornes et omnem clerum.” 


[PDF page 101]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 81 
of the universal Church and to the equally supreme rule of the Western 
Empire.!2! 
Further glosses on the many and dire inconsistencies of such an absurd 
text lead Valla to reaffirm sarcastically, yet again, the Constitutum’s false- 
ness on every level: 
Will servants in the employ of the Roman church be assigned the rank of 
general? ... Who fails to see that this fiction was concocted by persons who 
wanted complete license for themselves to dress up? I would imagine that if 
somewhere various games took place among the demons who live in the air, 
those creatures would be engaged in copying the ritual of clerics, their pag- 
eantry, and their luxury, and they would derive their greatest pleasure from 
this kind of theatrical competition.!22 
Beyond the list of imperial insignia and vestments (the Constitutum’s 
repeated insistence on which, notes Valla, is highly inappropriate), 
Constantine sees to the luxurious furnishing of St. Peter’s and St. Paul’s 
basilicas, the churches (ecclesiae) built on the “confession”-tombs of the 
two Apostles. But at the time of the Constitutum those basilicas did not yet 
exist. Valla must gloss these blatant anachronisms before going deeper 
into a more relevant ecclesiological critique. He does so by bringing into 
relief the term ecclesiae, used in the text of the Constitutum to indicate the 
Roman basilicas of St. Peter and St. Paul. But the Roman basilicas, Valla 
observes, are templa — sacred places designated for worship — while the 
Greek word ecclesia signifies a gathering place for people, or an “assembly 
of human beings” (coetus hominum) who are “fellow-citizens” (concives). 
Such citizens are constituted in the polis, ie, endowed with civil and nat- 
ural freedom, and at the same time are constitutive of the polis, since they 
possess the capacity to deliberate on it effectively. Hence the adoption 
and the transposition of the term ecclesia — with all its proper and specific 
semantic pregnancy — to indicate the evangelical “gathering of the faith- 
ful” (congregatio fidelium). Hence the use in a religious context — by Paul 
and the Koine Greek of the New Testament — of a classical term with polit- 
ical and civil connotations. 
121 [bid., 122-23 (54): “‘imperialia vestimenta’ universis clericis”; “effici patricios con- 
sules”; “culmen singularis potentie et precellentie.” 
122 [bid., 123.2f./6—11 (54): “Ministri, qui Romane ecclesie servient, dignitate afficientur 
imperatoria? ... Et quis non videt hanc fabulam ab iis excogitatam esse, qui sibi omnem 
vestiendi licentiam esse voluerunt? ut existimem, si qua inter demones, qui aerem incol- 
unt, ludorum genera exercentur, eos exprimendo clericorum cultu, fastu, luxu exerceri et 
hoc scenici lusus genere maxime delectari.” 


[PDF page 102]
82 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Valla outlines a path from the political ecclesia of Athens (and of the 
Roman respublica) to the religious ecclesia of the Gospel. It is a develop- 
ment, at once semantic, political, and theological, to which he will often 
refer in his writings, from the Elegantiae to the Adnotationes on the New 
Testament.23 Here in the “document of donation,’ he seems to hope to 
secure the most authoritative testimony to the perversion of that term, 
which was established by apostolic and New Testament linguistic usage to 
mean above all evangelical communion and the community made up (in 
the various cities) of the first Christians. Valla makes the parallel clear: as 
the evangelium had been institutionalized as an imperium divided among 
secular and religious, juridical and cultural hierarchies of power, thus the 
evangelical ecclesia had mutated from a communion of believers into a 
construction of walls and arches (“stones” that were in no way “living”). 
From a “community of the faithful’ it was changed into a templum (in no 
way “built on the foundation” of apostolic faith). According to Valla, the 
Constitutum was responsible for this utterly profound historical and 
semantic degradation of ecclesiology. It provided the essential testimony, 
as it was the original act of canonical institution and standardization. 
Hence the tone of sarcasm in Valla’s comment: 
You miserable dog, did Rome have ecclesiae, or rather templa, dedicated to 
Peter and Paul? Who built them? Who would have dared to build them? 
After all, as history tells us, nowhere was there any place for Christians apart 
from secret places and hidden dens. If there had been any templa at Rome 
dedicated to those apostles, they would not have required great lamps to be 
lit inside them. They were little shrines, not buildings; chapels, not templa, 
places of prayer in private dwellings, not public places of worship. No one 
therefore had to worry about temple lamps before there were the templa 
themselves. What are you talking about when you make Constantine speak 
of Peter and Paul as ‘blessed; but Sylvester, when he is still alive, as ‘most 
blessed, and his own ordinance as ‘sacred’ when he had been a pagan shortly 
before? Does so much have to be provided for keeping up the lamps that the 
whole world is worn down?!#4 
123 On the semantics of ecclesia, see Lorenzo Valla, Collatio Novi Testamenti, redazione 
inedita a cura di Alessandro Perosa (Firenze: Sansoni, 1970), 169 (Acts 19:39); idem, 
Elegantiae, IV, 47 (cited in Valla, De falso, 111, n. 218); Adnotationes in Novum Testamentum 
(Acts 19:39) in Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 297. 
124 Valla, De falso, 111.4-17 (47): “O furcifer, ecclesie ne, idest templa Rome erant Petro et 
Paulo dicate? Quis eas extruxerat? quis edificare ausus fuisset? cum nusquam foret, ut his- 
toria ait, christianis locus, nisi secreta et latebre. Aut si qua templa Rome fuissent illis 
dicata apostolis, non erant digna, in quibus tanta luminaria accenderentur, edicule sacre, 
non edes; sacella, non templa; oratoria intra privatos parietes, non publica delubra: non 
ergo ante cura gerenda erat de luminaribus templorum quam de ipsis templis. Quid ais tu, 
qui facis Constantinum dicentem Petrum et Paulum ‘beatos; Silvestrum vero, cum adhuc 


[PDF page 103]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 83 
Valla penetrates ever deeper with his critico-philological analysis into the 
dense textual thicket of the Constitutum. He clearly perceives that it is 
impossible to offer an adequately comprehensive exegetical reading of 
the heap of contradictions rising up from the “document of donation, 
Thus he observes: 
But why do I attack one individual point after another? I should run out of 
time if I try to mention, to say nothing of discuss, all of them.!25 
Nor will it be possible for us to follow Valla’s whole discourse in its particu- 
lars. It is far too complex, even if we were just to consider the details of its 
philological analysis. Let us then limit ourselves to a consideration of a 
final, insightful annotation, with which it seems Valla hopes to underline 
the fundamental contradiction of the whole Constitutum and of its corre- 
sponding Constantinian ecclesiology. First Valla cites from the text of the 
Constitutum: 
Before all else, however, we assign to the blessed Sylvester and to his succes- 
sors, according to our indiction [sc. the Constitutum], the right to name any- 
one he wishes to the clergy at his pleasure and by his own decision and to 
include that person in the pious ranks of the pious clergy, and that no one 
whatsoever should consider that he is acting arrogantly. 
And later, at the very end of the Constitutum: 
If, moreover, anyone — which we believe likely — emerges as a falsifier in this 
context, let him be condemned and subjected to eternal damnation. Let him 
know that his enemies are the holy apostles of God, Peter and Paul, in the 
present and in the life to come, and let him be burned in the lower reaches 
of hell and waste away together with the devil and all who are wicked.12° 
Valla immediately points out the dreadful inelegance of the Latin. In a few 
sentences the text piles up a heap of absurdities that are not only graceless 
but also — and this is much more injurious — heterodox. Constantine, 
vivit, ‘beatissimum’ et suam, qui paulo ante fuisset ethnicus, iussionem ‘sacram’? Tanta ne 
conferenda sunt pro luminaribus continuandis, ut totus orbis fatigetur?” [translation 
modified]. 
125 Jbid., 125.10-12 (56): “Verum quid ego in singula impetum facio? Dies me deficiat, si 
universa non dico amplificare, sed attingere velim” (emphasis added). 
126 Jbid., 125.13-17 (57); 134-7-11 (65): “Pre omnibus autem licentiam tribuimus beato 
Silvestro et successoribus eius ex nostro indictu, ut, quem placatus proprio consilio cleri- 
care voluerit et in religioso numero religiosorum clericoram connumerare, nullus ex 
omnibus presumat superbe agere .... Si quis autem, quod credimus, in hoc temerator exti- 
terit, eternis condemnationibus subiaceat condemnatus, et sanctos Dei apostolos Petrum 
et Paulum sibi in presenti et in futura vita sentiat contrarios, atque in inferno inferiori 
concrematus cum diabolo et omnibus deficiat impiis” [translation modified]. 


[PDF page 104]
84 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
having recently converted to the Christian religion, would have used his 
imperial authority to confer on no one less than the Bishop of Rome — 
Pope Sylvester, by whom he had been baptized only days before — and on 
his successors (exclusively) the (episcopal) right of priestly ordination. In 
addition, the text even seems to assert that the emperor himself conse- 
crated the Bishop of Rome! What is more, Constantine would have placed 
the seal of his own imperial power on a new (secular and spiritual) 
creation — the Roman papacy — and threatened anathemas and punish- 
ments (worldly and otherworldly) on whoever dare violate “the eternal 
prescriptions” of the Constitutum, issued with the absolute and unchal- 
lengeable authority that he enjoyed over the empire and over the “Catholic” 
Church! 
This and other ideological and historical distortions render the 
Constitutum a perverted document describing an ecclesiology gone mad. 
In response Valla protests: 
Who is this Melchizedek, who blesses Abraham the patriarch? Did 
Constantine, hardly yet a Christian, assign the privilege of making priests to 
the man by whom he was baptized and whom he calls blessed, as if Sylvester 
would not, and could not, have done this before? ... Such terrorizing, and 
such threatening are not characteristic of a secular ruler, but of the priests of 
old and the keepers of the flame, and nowadays of ecclesiastics: so this is not 
the speech of Constantine, but of some dim-witted petty cleric .... But if 
those threats and curses were really Constantine's, J would curse him in turn 
as a tyrant and destroyer of my respublica, and I would threaten to take ven- 
geance on him myself in my capacity as a Roman.}2” 
6.2. The Legenda Silvestri 
Valla now brings his analysis, begun on the text of the Constitutum, to bear 
on the Legenda Silvestri. His motivations for doing so were given above, 
but we will do well to rehearse them before proceeding further with our 
interpretation. The Constitutum seems to Valla to be an integral part of the 
Legenda Silvestri, such that the literary structure of the Legenda (taken in 
the entirety of its composition) specifies and gives meaning to the 
27 Ibid., 125.18-22 (57); 134.1215 (65); 134.25-135-3 (65): “Quis est hic Melchisedech, qui 
patriarcham Abraam benedicit? Constantinus ne vix christianus facultatem ei, a quo bap- 
tizatus est et quem beatum appellat, tribuit clericandi, quasi prius nec fecisset hoc Silvester 
nec facere potuisset? ... Hic terror atque hec comminatio non secularis principis solet esse, 
sed priscorum sacerdotum ac flaminum et nunc ecclesiasticorum: itaque non est 
Constantini oratio hec, sed alicuius clericuli stolidi .... Quod si mine he execrationesque 
Constantini forent, invicem execrarer ut tyrannum et profligatorem rei publice mee et illi me 
Romano ingenio minarer ultorem’” (emphasis added) [translation modified]. 


[PDF page 105]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 85 
Constitutum as a part of that entirety. In line with this premise, Valla con- 
ducts his analysis as if by expansion and contraction: from the Constitutum 
to the Legenda and then back again. That is, the analysis proceeds in oppo- 
site directions along lines of infratextuality. These link, on the one hand, 
the pseudo-Donation of Constantine as it appears in the text under con- 
sideration in Valla’s Oration, with the Legend of Sylvester on the other, 
which, since it contains the Constitutum as part of its structure, underlies 
it at the same time as an infratext. 
Valla writes: 
I shall say something ... about the fabula of Sylvester, because the entire issue 
turns on this, and for me it will be fitting to speak above all about the Roman 
pontiff, since my discourse is concerned with Roman pontiffs, with a view to 
facilitating inferences about the others from this one example. Of the many 
absurdities that are told, I touch only upon the one about the dragon, in 
order to show that Constantine never had leprosy. For the acts of Sylvester 
were written down by a certain Eusebius, a Greek man according to the tes- 
timony of the translator. That nation is always highly inclined to mendacity, 
as Juvenal says in a satirical assessment [Sat. X 174f.]: ‘whatever the lying 
Greeks make bold to claim as history.128 
In this passage we must note the reappearance of the distinction (first 
made in section III) between fabula (legend) and historia (history) as 
different narrative genres, and then we must turn our attention to the 
explanation of this distinction that is provided here and further on in 
section IV. The distinction between “legendary narrative” and “historical 
narrative” comes from book II, chapter 4 of Quintilian’s Jnstitutio oratoria. 
Valla reinterprets this text by rather cogently modifying the meanings of 
its terms, as can be seen from his glosses of it contained in the autograph 
manuscript in the Bibliothéque Nationale in Paris (Lat. 7723, f. 19 and ff.).!29 
128 Tbid., 144.4-14 (74) and Setz’s notes: “Disputabo ... de fabula Silvestri, quia et omnis in 
hoc questio versatur et mihi, cum sermo sit cum pontificibus Romanis, de pontifice Romano 
potissimum loqui decebit, ut ex uno exemplo facile aliorum coniectura capiatur. Et ex multis 
ineptiis, que ibi narrantur, unam tantum de dracone attingam, ut doceam Constantinum 
non fuisse leprosum. Etenim gesta Silvestri ab Eusebio quodam Greco homine, ut interpres 
testatur, composita sunt, que natio ad mendacia semper promptissima est, ut Iuvenalis 
satyrica censura ait: ‘quidquid Grecia mendax audet in historia” (emphasis added) [trans- 
lation modified]. 
129 On the autograph glosses on the Institutio in the Parisian manuscript, see: 
Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 8f., 120; Alessandro Perosa, “Ledizione 
veneta di Quintiliano coi commenti del Valla, di Pomponio Leto e di Sulpizio da Veroli,’ in 
Miscellanea Augusto Campana, 2 vols. (Padova: Antenore, 1981), 575-610; Lucia Cesarini 
Martinelli, “Le postille di Lorenzo Valla all’Institutio Oratoria di Quintiliano,” in Besomi 
and Regliosi (eds.), Lorenzo Valla e 'umanesimo italiano, 21-50. The text of Valla’s glosses 
on Institutio oratoria, II.4.2: “[Quintilian] did not agree with Cicero that fabula is that in 


[PDF page 106]
86 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
For Valla, fabula takes on a double meaning. The first is that of a fic- 
tional narrative that is in and of itself false, being an account or discourse 
totally devoid of factual events (res gestae) either present and contempo- 
rary or handed down in memory from the past. It stands in contrast to 
historical narration, which, being an authentic account or discourse 
reporting factual events, is in and of itself true. The second meaning of 
fabula is that of a narrative (narratio) that is in itself false but nevertheless 
still capable of taking on, and indeed of bearing in itself, a certain verisi- 
militude towards accounts or discourses reporting factual events. In this 
way it is portrayed or offered to the reader as a true and authentic history. 
The typical kind of “verisimilar fiction” narratio is for Valla the hagio- 
graphic legend, which developed as a sacred fictionalization in the sphere 
of Christianity’s origins, spanning from the apocryphal Gospels to the 
Legenda Silvestri. The defining characteristic of this type of sacred fiction- 
alization or hagiographic legend is the constant interweaving of the 
miraculous (the thaumaturgical) into the narrative, or rather of divine 
intervention in events and worldly reality as the object (as if they were 
factual events) of narration. The verisimilitude of such fictional narratives 
comes, in this case, from the (supposed) similarity and even intended (at 
least implicitly) assimilation of the miraculous and the thaumaturgical to 
the apparently similar canonical scriptures of the Old and New Testaments. 
Hence Valla’s attempt in section IV to demonstrate the falsities contained 
in the Legenda Silvestri, the hagiographic legend that contains and deter- 
mines the documentary act of the Constitutum and thus the whole event 
of the Donation of Constantine. 
Valla takes two aspects in particular of the Legenda into consideration. 
The first is the healing of Constantine’s leprosy, which occurs at the 
which there is neither truth nor anything resembling truth [De inventione, 1.27 and 
Rhetorica ad Herennium, 1.13], since, to give only one example, comedies are fabulae but 
nevertheless resemble the truth. As Terence says, ‘[the poet] should compose the kind of 
fabulae that would please the public [Andria, prol. 3]. Likewise, [Quintilian] did not say 
that historia is comprised of events remote from our own time, since — again to name 
only one example of many ~ Sallust refers to the works he himself composed as histories 
[cf. Cat. 1-4]. Nor did [Quintilian] say that argumentum is a fiction that nevertheless could 
have happened, since only in comedies is argumentum a fiction.” (“Non dixit quemadmo- 
dum Cicero, fabula est in qua nec vere nec verisimiles res continentur, quia, ne alia dicam, 
comediarum fabule sunt, et tamen verisimiles. Ut apud Terentium: ‘populo ut placerent 
quas fecisset fabulas.’ Item, non dixit: historia est gesta res ab etatis nostre remota, cum hic 
quoque plura non dicam, ipse Sallustius historias de se compositas dicat. Nec dixit: argu- 
mentum est ficta res, que tamen fieri poterit, quia non nisi in comediis argumentum est 
ficta res”) [f1gr]. On Quintilian’s text (lib. ILiv.2), cf. Wesley Trimpi, “The Quality of Fiction: 
the Rhetorical Transmission of Literary Theory,” Traditio 30 (1974): 1-8, at 47 and 
passim. 


[PDF page 107]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 87 
moment of his conversion to Christianity and baptism by Sylvester. The 
second is Sylvester’s miraculous freeing of the sacred virgins from the vile 
slavery of the diabolical dragon (a thaumaturgical element). 
Of the first Valla makes quick work, referring back briefly to what he 
had said earlier in sections II and III. The testimony of the Legend of 
Sylvester is undoubtedly false, he repeats, because it is in clear contradic- 
tion with Eusebius of Caesarea’s Ecclesiastical History. That is to say, the 
former is fabula, the latter historia. The verisimilitude of the hagiographic 
fictionalization results from the fact that the healing of Constantine’s lep- 
rosy (paganism) by means of his conversion (to Christianity) and baptism 
by Sylvester is an implicit scriptural citation, assimilating Constantine’s 
conversion to the New Testament story of Jesus’ healing of the leprosy of 
those who convert to the faith of the divine messiah.1°° 
But, Valla objects, the miraculous in this sacred fiction is not in line 
with the origins of the Christian people (because belied by the historia 
ecclesiastica, the actual history of the Church) nor even with God's inter- 
vention in the world, which was manifested to mankind with the 
Incarnation of the Word. Only the evangelical miraculousness of the mes- 
sianic signs, in line with faith in Christ, is an essential part of the history of 
salvation (historia salutis). Hagiographic legends of any type, then, and 
specifically that of Sylvester, are always and only “fake history” — the term 
used in the glossed heading of this section of the Oration.!! 
Valla dedicates more time to the second thaumaturgical aspect of the 
Legenda Silvestri: concerning Sylvester, the virgins, and the dragon. 
Indeed, he concentrates his arguments entirely on these miracles, thus 
demonstrating the Legenda’s utter inauthenticity. He shows it to be an 
extravagant hagiographic fabula composed of events and things that are 
“contradictory, impossible, stupid, barbarous, absurd ...”; it is utterly “fake 
history” (falsa historia). 
Valla poses a series of questions to determine the veracity of the Legend: 
Where had that dragon come from? No dragons are born in Rome. Where 
too had his poison come from? ... Besides, where had so much poison come 
from so as to infect such a big city ...? Why then did Sylvester not kill it as 
Daniel is said to have done, by binding it with a cord of hemp and wiping out 
its progeny forever? The fabricator of the legend did not want the dragon to 
be killed for fear that the derivation from the story of Daniel would seem 
obvious [Dan. 14:22-24]. Yet if Jerome [Commentary on Daniel], a most 
130 Valla, De falso, 67 (11) and 152 (79). 
131 Marginal manuscript heading (Valla, De falso, 144.8): “de falsa historia Silvestri.” 


[PDF page 108]
88 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
learned and reliable translator, Apollinaris, Origen, Eusebius, and others 
maintain that the story of Bel is a fiction, if even the Jews do not know it in 
the original of the Old Testament, in other words if the most learned of the 
Latin writers, most of the Greeks, and certain Hebrews condemn it as a fab- 
ula, shall I not condemn this story [the Legenda Silvestri], which is inspired 
by it, when it is supported by the authority of no writer and greatly surpasses 
its model in idiocy?!82 
We ought to take notice here of Valla’s procedure. First he strongly empha- 
sizes both the Legenda’s implicit allusion to the Book of Daniel and the 
former text’s verisimilitude, through intentional assimilation, to the latter. 
Then he resolutely extends his criticism to the inauthenticity of the Book 
of Daniel itself, for the purpose of demonstrating, almost as an argument 
a fortiori, the unquestionable non-veracity of the Legend of Sylvester. 
Valla reminds the reader that the Book of Daniel was thrown out of the 
Hebrew scriptural canon and was never included in the Christian one, 
either in the Greek or the Latin patristic traditions. Although technically 
within the sphere of the Christian scriptural canon, it will always be num- 
bered among the so-called deuterocanonical books. What is more, Valla 
continues, the reasons for the book’s elimination from the canon nearly 
all stem from the peculiar nature of its narrative. It is a tale full of extraor- 
dinary events and purported miracles, just like the Legend about Pope 
Sylvester, the virgins, and the dragon. 
Considerations of this type recur throughout Valla’s writings, not only 
in the Oration but also in other works of commentary and annotation. One 
can thus say that it is Valla’s standard operating procedure to reduce all 
apocryphal writings, in a most radical way, completely to the status of 
fabula. This is the case both for biblical pretenders to a place in the Old or 
New Testaments — the deuterocanonical books and the apocryphal 
Gospels of early Christianity — and for the mass of medieval hagiography, 
182 Valla, De falso, 144.14-146.15 (74-75): “Unde draco ille venerat? Rome dracones non 
gignuntur. Unde etiam illi venenum? ... Unde preterea tantum veneni, ut tam spatiosam 
civitatem peste corrumperet ...? Cur ergo, ut Daniel illum dicitur occidisse, non et Silvester 
hunc potius occidisset, quem canabaceo filo alligasset, et domum illam in eternum per- 
didisset? Ideo commentor fabule noluit draconem interimi, ne plane Danielis narratio 
referri videretur. Quod si Hieronymus, vir doctissimus ac fidelissimus interpres, 
Apollinarisque et Origenes atque Eusebius et nonnulli alii narrationem Beli fictam esse 
affirmant, si eam Iudei in veteris instrumenti archetypo non agnoscunt, idest si doctissimi 
quique Latinorum, plerique Grecorum, singuli Hebreorum illam ut fabulam damnant, ego 
non hanc adumbratam ex illa damnabo, que nullius scriptoris auctoritate fulcitur et que 
magistram multo superat stultitia?” [translation modified]. The reference to Jerome is 
found in Commentariorum in Danielem libri III, ed. Franciscus Glorie (Turnhout: Brepols, 
1964), 773) 774 


[PDF page 109]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 89 
collected by the Dominican Jacopo da Voragine as the Golden Legend 
(Legenda aurea). This summa of Christian hagiography enjoyed incredible 
popularity, as is attested, among other things, by the omnipresent iconog- 
raphy of the Legenda Silvestri. In a gloss on Quintilian (on the same sec- 
tion of the Institutio oratoria referred to above: II.4.18), Valla writes about 
historia and fabula: “This can be found even in sacred things, like with 
regard to Susanna, to Tobias, to Judith; likewise in more recent accounts, 
like those of St. George and of others still, where there are many reasons 
for rejecting them.”83 
To Valla, completely dedicated to falsifying the Constitutum and to 
demystifying the Donation of Constantine, the legend of Sylvester had to 
seem a sacred fiction, and one whose apocryphal elements had provided 
the founding paradigm for a Constantinian ecclesiology opposed to the 
Gospel. In fact, the legend’s infratextual relationship to the “document of 
donation” ends up establishing and defining the falseness of that “docu- 
ment.” That is to say, as the sacred fiction of the Legenda attacked the 
evangelical truth of the history of salvation (historia salutis) at its core, 
thus the Constitutum’s falseness threatened the foundation of the history 
of the church (historia ecclesiastica), understood as the historical develop- 
ment of the Christian community, sprung from and built on the Gospel. 
At this point, Valla expands his reflections to include the production of 
Christian literature and hagiography. It is obvious to him that the mytho- 
logical fiction used by pagan peoples to establish their own heroic and 
divine origins would also be taken up by Christians and applied, with an 
almost sacrilegious transposition, to their own origins. But, Valla asserts, 
the origins of the Christian people have their roots solely and exclusively 
in the revelation of the Gospel, which is the authentic “history of salva- 
tion.” There the heroic and the miraculous are God’s worldly presence in 
Christ and the Holy Spirit; hence the historical presence of the divine, in 
temporal affairs, which is only and always perceptible through “faith” 
(fides) in the mystery of the Incarnation. Thus Valla writes: 
We should be ashamed, we should be ashamed of this silliness and frivolity 
beyond anything in theatrical shows. A Christian, who calls himself a child 
of the truth and light [John 12:36], should blush to utter things that are not 
133 Paris, Bibl. Nat., Lat. 7723, f.gv: “Hoc queri potest etiam in rebus sacris, ut de 
Susanna, de Tobia, de Iudit, item de historiis recentioribus, ut Sancti Georgii, ut alioram 
multorum, ubi plura sunt argumenta ad improbandum.” [Camporeale’s reading of the 
manuscript differs slightly from that found in Lorenzo Valla, Le postille allInstitutio orato- 
ria di Quintiliano, eds. Lucia Cesarini Martinelli and Alessandro Perosa (Padova: Antenore, 
1996). Eds. ] 


[PDF page 110]
90 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
only not true, but not even plausible [see Quintilian, Institutio oratoria, Il.4]. 
‘But; they say, ‘demons gained this power among the pagans to mock those 
who served the gods. Be quiet, you utterly ignorant people, not to say crimi- 
nals, who invariably draw a veil like this over your fabulae. Christian candor 
has no need to shelter under falsehood. It is defended enough and more 
than enough on its own through its light and truth without those lying and 
flashy tales that are profoundly insulting to God, to Christ, and to the Holy 
Spirit. Had God so turned over the human race to the will of demons that 
they would be seduced by such obvious, such imperious miracles, to such an 
extent that he could almost be accused of injustice for having entrusted 
sheep to wolves, and men would have a signal excuse for their errors? But if 
the demons had so much license before, they would have even more now 
among the infidels. We see that this is not at all the case, and no fabulae of 
this kind are advanced by them. I shall say nothing of other peoples: I shall 
speak about the Romans, among whom very few miracles are reported, and 
these both ancient and uncertain.1*4 
It need arouse no wonder, Valla continues, that pre-Christian peoples cre- 
ated various myths about their origins and told their prehistory in epic 
language, where human actions are muddled with heroic and divine inter- 
vention. He reminds us of Livy’s statement that the traditions of extraordi- 
nary events concerning Rome’s origins, diversely found in ancient 
recorders of Roman affairs, must be used by historians to construct fables 
that will establish an epic version (epos) of the people’s roots. Historians 
must create a poetic (mythic) fiction of a past that has been lost in prehis- 
tory. Valla quotes two passages of Livy’s text: 
‘This allowance is granted to antiquity, that by commingling the human 
with the divine it may make the origins of cities more grandiose; and else- 
where: ‘But in such ancient history I would be satisfied if whatever is like the 
truth be accepted as truth. All this is more suited to theatrical spectacle, 
184 Valla, De falso, 147.15-148.18 (76): “Pudeat nos, pudeat harum neniarum et levitatis 
plus quam mimice, erubescat christianus homo, qui veritatis se ac lucis filium nominat, 
proloqui, que non modo vera non sunt, sed nec verisimilia. ‘At enim; inquiunt, ‘hanc 
demones potestatem in gentibus optinebant, ut eas diis servientes illuderent.’ Silete, 
imperitissimi homines, ne dicam sceleratissimos, qui fabulis vestris tale semper velamen- 
tum optenditis. Non desiderat sinceritas christiana patrocinium falsitatis, satis per se 
superque sua ipsius luce ac veritate defenditur sine istis commenticiis ac prestigiosis fabel- 
lis in Deum, in Christum, in Spiritum sanctum contumeliosissimis. Siccine Deus arbitrio 
demonum tradiderat genus humanum, ut tam manifestis, tam imperiosis miraculis sedu- 
cerentur? ut propemodum posset iniustitie, accusari, qui oves lupis commisisset, et homi- 
nes magnam errorum suorum haberent excusationem? Quod si tantum olim licebat 
demonibus et nunc apud infideles vel magis liceret, quod minime videmus, nec ulle ab eis 
huiusmodi fabule proferuntur. Tacebo de aliis populis, dicam de Romanis, apud quos pau- 
cissima miracula feruntur eaque vetusta atque incerta” (emphasis added) [translation 
modified]. 


[PDF page 111]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE Ql 
which loves miraculous events, than to reliability, and it is not worthwhile 
either to affirm or refute it/195 
Valla approves of Livy’s “learning” (doctrina) and “weightiness” (gravitas) — 
as he does of that of Valerius Maximus and Varro — regarding the ancient 
fables that record the origins and prehistory of the Roman people. On the 
other hand, he feels the need to reject categorically the introduction of 
this kind of mythical and sacred fictionalization from the sphere of the 
pagan world into that of Christianity’s origins: 
But our own fabula-spinners indiscriminately bring in talking statues, about 
which pagans themselves and idolators say nothing. They repudiate such 
stories more strenuously than the Christians affirm them. Among pagans 
the very small number of miracles does not depend upon the trustworthi- 
ness of the authors but, as it were, upon a certain holy and venerable claim 
of antiquity. Among Christians relatively recent miracles are recounted, 
even though those who lived at that time knew nothing about them. J do not 
impugn admiration of the saints nor deny their divine works, since I know that 
as much faith as a mustard seed can move even mountains [Matt. 17:20]. On 
the contrary, I defend and protect those works, but I refuse to let them be con- 
Jused with made-up stories. | cannot be persuaded that those writers were 
anything other than infidels, who did this in mockery of the Christians — to 
see if these fictions would be conveyed by treacherous men into the hands 
of the ignorant and accepted as true -, or believers aspiring to imitate God 
but without knowledge, men who were bold enough not only to write about 
deeds of the saints but to compose irresponsible pseudepigrapha on the 
Mother of God and Christ himself. The supreme pontiff calls these books 
Apocrypha, as if there were nothing wrong with an unknown author — as if 
the stories told were believable — as if they were sacred and served to 
strengthen religion, so that now whoever approves something bad is no less 
culpable than the person who made it up.1%° 
135 Tbid., 149.14—20 (77): “Datur hec venia antiquitati, ut miscendo humana divinis pri- 
mordia urbium augustiora faciat, et alibi: ‘Sed in rebus tam antiquis, si qua similia veri 
sunt, pro veris accipiantur, satis habeam, hec ad ostentationem scene gaudentis miraculis 
aptiora quam ad fidem, neque affirmare neque refellere est opere pretium.” [The passages 
of Livy are Pref. 7 and 5.21.9. | 
136 Valla, De falso, 151.3-26 (78): “At vero nostri fabulatores passim inducunt idola 
loquentia, quod ipsi gentiles et idolorum cultores non dicunt et sincerius negant quam 
christiani affirmant. Apud illos paucissima miracula non fide auctorum, sed veluti sacra 
quadam ac religiosa vetustatis commendatione nituntur; apud istos recentiora quedam 
narrantur, que illorum homines temporum nescierunt. Neque ego admirationi sanctorum 
derogo nec ipsorum divina opera abnuo, cum sciam tantum fidei, quantum est granum sina- 
pis, montes etiam posse transferre. Immo defendo illa et tueor, sed misceri cum fabulis non 
sino. Nec persuaderi possum hos scriptores alios fuisse quam aut infideles, qui hoc agerent 
in derisum christianorum, si hec figmenta per dolosos homines in manus imperitorum 
delata acciperentur pro veris, aut fideles habentes quidem emulationem Dei, sed non 
secundum scientiam, qui non modo de gestis sanctorum, verum etiam Dei genitricis atque 


[PDF page 112]
92 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
The section of this passage in italics is one of extreme importance for 
Valla’s argument, which is aimed at determining the “truth of faith” (veri- 
tas fidei). Valla makes a crystal clear distinction between the “miracles” 
(miracula) or thaumaturgical events of the “pagans and idol worshipers” 
on the one hand, and the “divine works” (opera divina) or thaumaturgical 
events of the “saints” (sancti) on the other. The former belong without a 
doubt to a people’s heroic prehistory, to its mythical origins and epic nar- 
rative. The latter, on the other hand, are “works of faith” (opera fidei). They 
are events that occur in the context of the secular and spiritual history of 
the “church” (ecclesia) of the religious faithful, in formal and real continu- 
ity with the extraordinary interventions of the divine in the human and 
worldly sphere as they are reported in the Scriptures. 
The Scriptures report these thaumaturgical events as, and precisely 
because they are, “messianic signs” of the Incarnation of the divine 
(semeia-signa, according to the New Testament conception and linguistic 
usage of John). Or rather, the Scriptures report them as, and because they 
are, “extraordinary events” in the context of the history of salvation 
(terata-miracula, according to the conceptions and linguistic usage of the 
Synoptic Gospels). In this sense, Valla had already had occasion — in his 
Collatio!>” of the New Testament (Matt. 7:22) — to define the thaumaturgi- 
cal events of the Scriptures as “miracles and works of divine power, which 
without love do no good.”88 
Valla denies any intention whatsoever of detracting from the “admira- 
tion of the saints” with his criticism of traditional hagiography. Nor has he 
any desire to deny the saints’ admirable lives, inasmuch as they are held to 
be “divine works” (divina opera). He knows well, he affirms, that with even 
a mere mustard seed of evangelical “faith” (fides) everything is possible in 
the sphere of divine action and saving grace. Furthermore, precisely 
because he proposes to defend (tueri) this proposition, he can permit nei- 
ther himself nor others to transpose the “acts” (gesta) of the saints — and 
especially not those of Christ and Mary — from their authentic historical 
context to the unmerited one of hagiographic fabula and “apocryphal” 
adeo Christi improba quedam et pseudoevangelia scribere non reformidarunt. Et summus 
pontifex hos libros appellat apocryphos, quasi nihil vitii sit, nisi quod eorum ignoratur auc- 
tor; quasi credibilia sint, que narrantur; quasi sancta et ad confirmationem religionis perti- 
nentia, ut iam non minus culpe sit penes hunc, qui mala probat, quam penes illum, qui 
mala excogitavit” (emphasis added) [translation modified]. 
87 [The Collatio Novi Testamenti (Collation of the New Testament) was an early version of 
the Adnotationes. Eds. | 
88 Valla, Collatio Novi Testamenti, 38.11-12: “miracula et opera potentie divine, que sine 
caritate nil prosunt.’ 


[PDF page 113]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 93 
writing. Moreover, such a transposition is motivated, in Valla’s view, either 
by anti-Christian “treachery” (dolus) or by the aspiration “to imitate God 
but without knowledge.” That is to say it would lack the kind of knowing 
that is proper to the believer, i.e. the scientia fidei (the “knowledge of faith,’ 
or theology) promoted by Paul. Indeed, it was precisely this kind of igno- 
rance and perversion of evangelical faith, dating from the Middle Ages all 
the way back to ancient Christianity, that brought about both Jacopo da 
Voragine’s Legend of the Saints (Legenda sanctorum) and the apocryphal 
scriptures of the Old and New Testaments (the deuterocanonical books of 
the Old and the pseudoevangelia, or “pseudo-Gospels,’ as Valla calls them, 
of the New). 
Valla writes all this —- and we refer in particular to the last passage 
quoted above — for the express purpose of reviving a more authentic evan- 
gelism. He does so by criticizing on the one hand the promise of miracles 
found in the (strongly ideological) hagiography produced by ancient and 
medieval Christianity, and on the other hand the (specifically theologico- 
scholastic) conception of biblical and extra-biblical miracles as events or 
actions whose possibility is defined and measured in relation to their 
proximity to the laws of nature. 
In the admittedly wide and variegated sphere of scholasticism, miracles 
are understood as events beyond the laws of nature, and thus they are 
essentially (out-of-the-ordinary) supernatural occurrences. With his criti- 
cism of this conception of miracles, Valla seems to want to restore the 
“acts of the saints” and, first and foremost, the “divine works” of the 
Scriptures, to the biblical perspective of such events and actions as essen- 
tially divine and messianic signs. This can be formulated differently but 
still in line with what is, I believe, a correct interpretation of Valla’s dis- 
tinction between pagan heroic narrative and the scriptural narrative of 
the Judeo-Christian tradition. For Valla, once all is said and done, myth- 
epic is and always will be historia within the biblical and evangelical his- 
tory of salvation. In the context of paganism and the non-Christian 
religions, however, it was and remains essentially fabula. 
Thus we understand Valla’s deeper motive for censuring the papacy: it 
allowed the tradition of Christian hagiography to be replaced by the read- 
ing of texts outside the tradition of the Bible, such as the deuterocanonical 
books and the apocryphal Gospels. Valla acutely observes that the attribu- 
tion of apocryphal texts is purely mechanical and thus without any doctri- 
nal value — a point which in any case, he stresses, ought to have been 
expressed and defined somehow. In other words, the Magisterium ought 
to have clarified the nature of the difference, if not the conflict, between 


[PDF page 114]
94 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
the “apocryphal” and “canonical” Gospels: the former subvert the latter 
because they deny the properly evangelical truth of specifically Christian 
historia. Regarding the apocryphal Gospels, then, one must not only con- 
fess to not knowing their authorship. One must also affirm, and without 
reservation, their “falseness,” which was propagated in an anti-evangelical 
and anti-Christian way. The “apocrypha” are then pseudo-scriptures, 
“impious pseudo-Gospels.” 
Therefore Valla blames Pope Gelasius for not condemning in the least 
an indubitably legendary and “apocryphal” hagiography like the Actus 
beati Silvestri presulis (the title of the book recording the gesta Silvestri, or 
“acts of Sylvester”). The failure to take such a position had the effect of 
according to the Actus and other hagiographic legends (like the “apocry- 
pha’ of the Old and New Testaments) an official sanction of credibility. It 
is as if such pseudo-scriptures, while they do not have to be recognized as 
canonical, can instead be regarded “as if they were sacred and served to 
strengthen religion” (emphasis added). Let us not forget here Valla’s posi- 
tion. He goes beyond even Jerome’s skepticism and his cautionary princi- 
ple regarding the entire body of Old Testament “apocrypha/hagiography.” 
Jerome, for his part, stands in direct contrast to Augustine, who consid- 
ered the deuterocanonical books as accepted along with the canonical 
ones and having “equal authority.’ On the contrary, Jerome reduced the 
apocryphal/hagiographic parts of Scripture to the following general prin- 
ciple, which is of a wholly pastoral order: these books are read by the 
church “to edify the people, not to strengthen the authority of ecclesiastical 
doctrines.”139 
Valla, instead, with his criticism of the papacy vis-a-vis the credibility of 
apocryphal and hagiographic texts, goes well beyond Jerome’s position. 
He peremptorily indicts both the authors of such writings and above all 
the papacy for having inserted such anti-Scriptural fabulae into the 
Christian tradition and thus for having counterfeited the true faith: 
The supreme pontiff calls these books Apocrypha, as if there nothing wrong 
with an unknown author, — as if the stories told were believable, — as if they 
were sacred and served to strengthen religion, so that now whoever [i.e., the 
pope] approves something bad is no less culpable than the person [ie., 
the author] who made it up. 
189 Augustine, De doctrina christiana, lib. I, cap. 8 (PL 34: 40-41): “aequalis auctoritatis,” 
“in auctoritatem recipi meruerunt”; Jerome, Praefatio in libros Salomonis, PL 28:1241-1244, 
at 1243: “ad edificationem plebis, non ad authoritatem ecclesiasticorum dogmatum confir- 
mandam’ (emphasis added). Cf. Camporeale, “Giovanmaria dei Tolosani,” 170-174 (= idem, 
Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma, 363-367). 


[PDF page 115]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 95 
He continues: 
We detect spurious coins, we separate them out and throw them away: shall 
we not detect spurious teaching, but rather hold on to it? Shall we mix it up 
with good teaching and defend it as good?14° 
Therefore the acceptance of apocryphal hagiographic literature into the 
religious tradition and into Christian piety corresponds, in Valla’s meta- 
phor, to putting counterfeit currency (nummos reprobos) into circulation. 
The creation of that literature, then, is to be compared to the act of coun- 
terfeiting money, which constitutes an almost fatal attack on the civil life 
of the community, since it corrodes the structure of commercial, eco- 
nomic, and social transactions. The sacred and hagiographic fictionaliza- 
tion of the apocryphal Gospels, of the Legenda Silvestri (including the 
Constitutum), and of the entire Golden Legend — together with their respec- 
tive author-forgers — is thus the coining of a linguistic usage that is, con- 
trary to its common appearance, illegal and false. Indeed, it is by its very 
nature a non-“scriptural” and “false” language, because it does not say the 
revealed truth. Worse still, it is the sheer reversal of the truth of the 
Scriptures and evangelical faith. 
The metaphor of language (and literature) as money is taken directly 
from Quintilian, who in his Institutio oratoria writes, “authoritative cus- 
tomary usage is the sure guide for speaking, and language is clearly to be 
used like money: as common currency.”!*! Now, both Quintilian’s concep- 
tion of language as “authoritative customary usage” and his related meta- 
phor of “language as money” were first used explicitly by Valla, and at the 
same time revised by him, in the first version of the Repastinatio. There 
Valla quotes Quintilian’s text directly and modifies it by clarifying further 
the nature and function of language. Indeed, one could say — and we have 
argued as much elsewhere — that this passage from the Institutio provided 
the origin and foundation, chronologically as well as analytically and the- 
oretically, for the whole gnoseological and epistemological spectrum 
developed throughout the Repastinatio. Here we refer to Valla’s 
140 Valla, De falso, 151.26-152.2 (78): “... et summus pontifex hos libros appellat apocry- 
phos, quasi nihil vitii sit, nisi quod eorum ignoratur auctor; quasi credibilia sint, que nar- 
rantur; quasi sancta et ad confirmationem religionis pertinentia, ut iam non minus culpe 
sit minus penes hunc [sc. pontificem], qui mala probat, quam penes illum [sc. auctorem], 
qui mala excogitavit. Nummos reprobos discernimus, separamus, abiicimus: doctrinam rep- 
robam non discernemus, sed retinebimus? sed cum bona miscebimus? sed pro bona defen- 
demus?” (emphasis added). 
141 Institutio oratoria, 1.6.3: “Consuetudo certissima est loquendi magistra, utendumque 
plane sermone ut nummo, cui publica forma est.” 


[PDF page 116]
96 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
sophisticated conception of the “science” (scientia) of rhetoric as the new 
instrument (novum organon) of knowing and understanding in general, 
and of the function and meaning of language specifically. 
Let us quickly recapitulate the essential elements of Valla’s conception 
of language, which he developed in the wake of his reinterpretation of 
Quintilian. Linguistic usage, as a phenomenon that comes into being in all 
historical languages, is essentially a convention originating in civil society. 
It is the civitas as such that establishes language, which then slowly diver- 
sifies over space and time according to variations in the types of civil soci- 
ety and their respective cultural differences. Therefore, it is the customary 
use (consuetudo) of a language (sermo), its historical and consistent 
“usage” (usus loquendi) — whether spoken or written or, above all, “liter- 
ary” (and this is the true certissima consuetudo, the authoritative custom- 
ary usage par excellence) — that ultimately invents and determines the 
grammatical and semantic structures of any one language (sermo) in par- 
ticular. Hence the metaphor formulated by Quintilian and revised by 
Valla: “language is to be used like money: as common currency.” 
Once having introduced it, Valla continues to develop and extend this 
metaphor. He returns to it again and again throughout his text, making 
the most of the pregnant likeness it bears in terms of value and origin. 
Every language, precisely because it is the foundation of civil communica- 
tion, is a political convention in the strongest and fullest meaning of the 
term. To coin money different from that minted by the civil and political 
community is to coin a worthless and counterfeit money that is extremely 
harmful, if not fatal, to the city. It undermines first the city’s subsistence 
and then its well-being, which are constituted by social relations and 
financial and commercial transactions. Similarly, the counterfeiter of lan- 
guage, i.e. of the laws by which the community itself has sanctioned 
language — the certissima consuetudo of that sermo — corrodes the founda- 
tion of civil and political society. He frustrates interrelations and commu- 
nication, and he devalues the richness of its culture. 
Consequently, the punishment befitting the counterfeiter of language, 
who deprives even his own speech of meaning, is expulsion from the city. 
Similarly, and commensurate with his heinous crime, the counterfeiter of 
money is eliminated from the civil and political community by means of 
capital punishment. It was in this sense that Valla had previously written 
in the first version of his Repastinatio (bk. 2, ch. 9): 
Whoever deviates from common linguistic usage must be expelled from the 
circle of the literati, just as the despiser of laws and mores must be expelled 
from the city. And as there are various mores and laws among the various 


[PDF page 117]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 97 
nations and peoples, thus there are various languages, and among each their 
own is sacred and inviolate. This language is therefore sanctioned by the 
usage of the most reputable authors and by a kind of public approval of the 
people. It is treated like law and right. 
Later, in the second version of the Repastinatio (bk. 2, ch. 4), he would add: 
Nor should we accord any mercy to the jurists and theologians of our time, 
the dialecticians and philosophers who do not obey the words of their own 
discipline. Rather, with their debased manner of speaking they seem to have 
conspired and, like a group of daughter cities, to have sworn an oath against 
their own metropolis.!42 
In section IV of the Oration, Valla borrows Quintilian’s language-money 
metaphor in a similar way. Nevertheless, he deploys its terms for a differ- 
ent, specific end. In the Repastinatio, Valla has his eye on the counterfeit- 
ing of philosophical language in the realm of Aristotelian-scholastic 
speculation. Here in the Oration, he deploys the metaphor against a differ- 
ent kind of linguistic counterfeiting, one that is more properly ecclesiologi- 
cal and which took the form of sacred and hagiographic fictionalizations 
like the deuterocanonical books, the apocryphal Gospels, the legends of 
the saints, and thus also the Legenda Silvestri. An integral part of the 
Legenda is of course the Constitutum, the sacred fiction par excellence. 
For Valla, then, all parabiblical literature (of the New and Old 
Testaments) and all of medieval hagiography is “false money” that has 
been treacherously introduced into the civitas christiana. It constitutes 
the coining of a “vile and false” linguistic usage that is fatal to the church 
(ecclesia), which is founded on faith (fides) and pervaded by the language 
(sermo) of the Gospel. Such literature is the fruit of sacred, pseudo- 
evangelical story-telling and is thus of necessity a pseudo-ecclesiological 
language. Its most outstanding exemplar is the Constantinian language of 
the Constitutum. Thus Valla’s argument continues: 
For my part, to speak candidly, I deny that the Gesta Silvestri is apocryphal, 
because, as I have said, a certain Eusebius is alleged as author, but J consider 
142 Valla, Repastinatio, 475 and 198: “[A consuetudine loquendi] siquis desciverit, non 
secus a choro litteratorum repellendus, quam legum morumque contemptor a civitate 
expellendus est. Et ut sunt varii mores varieque leges nationum ac populorum, ita varie 
linguarum, apud suos unaqueque intemerata et sancta. Hec itaque usu clarissimorum auc- 
torum et publico quasi populi consensu sancita, inter leges ac iura reponuntur”; “Quominus 
danda venia est iurisperitis ac theologis recentibus, dialecticisque ac philosophis nostris 
qui verba scientie sue non audiunt, sed in prave loquendo nescio quomodo conspiraver- 
unt et quasi diverse civitates in suam metropolim coniurarunt.’; Camporeale, “Lorenzo 
Valla. Repastinatio,” 228ff. 


[PDF page 118]
98 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
it false and not worth reading, not only in other points but particularly in 
what is related about the dragon, the bull, and the leprosy, which I have done 
so much to refute. If Naaman was a leper, we shall not say straightaway that 
Constantine was too. Many authors have mentioned the former case, but 
about the latter, involving the ruler of the world, no one, not even one of his 
own citizens, has written, unless some foreigner did.43 
Writings like the Actus beati Silvestri (whether including the “document of 
donation” or not), and even more so those which subsequently, according 
to Valla, make up the Legenda Silvestri, are without a doubt “false litera- 
ture.” As texts they are unfit for reading in the context of a Christian litur- 
gical assembly, especially (as attested by Pope Gelasius) in the liturgical 
assemblies of the Roman church. The hagiographies of Pope Sylvester are 
singularly false and unworthy, both — and above all — for what is said about 
Sylvester’s miraculous healing of Constantine’s leprosy, and for the con- 
nection they posit between the miracle, the emperor’s conversion to 
Christianity, and the donation. Here is the core of the fabula of Pope 
Sylvester and Constantine. Here is the foundation and the origin of the 
donation’s status as a legend. Here is the source from which springs Valla’s 
Oration, the source “which I have done so much to refute.” This sentence 
contains the key both to understanding Valla’s procedure and to reading 
his text. 
All in all, Valla’s thesis can be summed up as follows. The Donation of 
Constantine is a legend because it can be distilled to the legendary status 
or inauthentic account of Pope Sylvester’s miraculous healing and conver- 
sion of the emperor. And it was the sacred and hagiographic fictionaliza- 
tion about Pope Sylvester (the Legenda Silvestri) that simultaneously 
forged and contained the pseudo-Donation of Constantine. 
Let us now conclude by returning to our reading of this section of Valla’s 
discourse. It continues: 
But why should I be surprised that the pontiffs did not understand these 
things, when they are ignorant about their own name? They claim that Peter 
was called Cephas because he was the ‘head’ of the apostles, as if this word 
were Greek from kephale, and not Hebrew or rather Syriac. The Greeks write 
Képhas, ‘which’ among them ‘is translated as Petros’ [John 1:42] not ‘head. 
43 Valla, De falso, 152.3—12 (79): “Ego vero, ut ingenue feram sententiam, gesta Silvestri 
nego esse apocrypha, quia, ut dixi, Eusebius quidam fertur auctor, sed falsa atque indigna 
que legantur existimo, cum in aliis tum vero in eo, quod narratur de dracone, de tauro, de 
lepra, propter quam refutandam tanta repetii. Neque enim, si Naaman leprosus fuit, con- 
tinuo et Constantinum leprosus fuisse dicemus. De illo multi auctores meminerunt, de hoc 
principe orbis terrarum nemo ne suorum quidem civium scripsit, nisi nescio quis alien- 
igena” (emphasis added) [translation modified]. 


[PDF page 119]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 99 
‘Petrus/Petra’ is a Greek word, and Petra is stupidly explained by a Latin ety- 
mology [of Balbi of Genoa] as meaning ‘trodden underfoot. The pontiffs 
distinguish a metropolitan from an archbishop and want [according to the 
etymology of Isidore] the former to be derived from the size of the city, 
although in Greek it is not ‘metropolis’ but métropolis, that is — mother state 
or city. They [e.g., Isidore] explain patriarch as if ‘father of father) ... and 
many other similar errors that I omit, lest I seem to be charging all the 
supreme pontiffs with the mistakes of some.!44 
In this final part of section IV, Valla shifts the focus of his critical analysis 
from the text of the Constitutum and its wider context in the Legenda 
Silvestri to the medieval grammarians and their etymology. Using a philo- 
logical procedure similar to that deployed in his Adnotationes on Livy and 
on the New Testament, Valla brings morphological and semantic analysis 
to bear on the grammar of medieval etymologies spanning from the 
Etymologiae of Isidore of Seville (“the first and the most arrogant among 
the unlearned”) to the Catholicon of Balbi of Genoa (“the rather unlearned 
teachers Eberhard, Huguccio, the Catholicon, and Aymo, who profess to 
know nothing for a high fee”).145 
As the hagiography of the Legenda established Constantinian ecclesiol- 
ogy for the purposes of the papacy’s imperial theocracy, thus medieval 
grammar later helped to nourish that same ecclesiology for the purposes 
of that very theocracy. As hagiography was a false coinage with the power 
to de-evangelize original ecclesiological language, thus that counterfeit 
currency was later recoined and defused by the “ideological etymology” of 
144 Thid., 153.3-154.6 (80) and Setz’s notes: “Sed quid mirer hec non intelligere ponti- 
fices, cum nomen ignorent suum: Cephas enim dicunt vocari Petrum, quia ‘caput’ apos- 
tolorum esset, tanquam hoc vocabulum sit Grecum apo tou kephale et non Hebraicum seu 
potius Syriacum, quod Greci Képhas scribunt, ‘quod apud eos interpretatur Petrus, non 
‘caput’. Est enim ‘Petrus’ et ‘petra’ Grecum vocabulum stulteque per etymologiam Latinam 
exponitur ‘petra quasi pede trita’ Et metropolitanum ab archiepiscopo distinguunt vol- 
untque illum a mensura civitatis dictum, cum Grece dicatur non ‘metropolis, sed 
métropolis, idest mater civitas sive urbs; et patriarcham quasi ‘patrem patrum, ... et multa 
alia similia, que transeo, ne culpa aliquorum omnes summos pontifices videar insectari.’ 
[Valla does not himself identify the etymologists he attacks in his text; their names have 
been supplied here in square brackets from Setz’s apparatus. Eds.] See also Francisco Rico, 
Nebrija frente a los badrbaros. El canon de gramaticos nefastos en la polémica del humanismo 
(Salamanca: Universidad, 1978), 22-27. 
145 [Valla, Elegantiae, book Il, preface: “primus ... indoctorum arrogantissimus’; “indoc- 
tiores Hebrardus, Hugutio, Catholicon, Aymo ... magna mercede docentes nihil scire.” 
Eugenio Garin, Prosatori latini del quattrocento (Milano: R. Ricciardi, 1952), 602, n. 1, identi- 
fies three of the teachers and texts as Ebehrard of Bethune, Graecismsus, Huguccio of Pisa, 
Magnae derivationes, and Giovanni Balbi of Genoa, Catholicon. Aymo might refer to Nicola 
de Aymo, whose Interrogatorio (1444) was a Latin-vernacular grammar; see La grammatica 
latino-volgare di Nicola de Aymo (Lecce, 1444), ed. Maria d’Enghien (Galatino: Congedo, 
2008). Eds. ] 


[PDF page 120]
100 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
the medieval grammarians, who converted it into halfpenny words whose 
semantic value depreciated from ecclesial (evangelical) to ecclesiastical 
(institutional).!4° 
Valla offers only a few examples. Nor could he have done otherwise 
within the confines of his discourse, even though it is concentrated fully — 
and, we should add, insightfully so — on the specific topic of “ideological 
etymology” in order to make the case definitively for all of section IV. 
Valla takes up the etymology of Cephas/Petra as an emblematic exam- 
ple. Christ had given this new name to the apostle Peter because he was to 
provide the foundation and support of the new faith (fides); he was to be 
the “rock” on which to erect the new church (ecclesia) of the Gospel. 
Isidore’s etymology resolves this name in the meaning of caput, the head 
of the apostolic and ecclesiastical hierarchy. For Isidore, Peter becomes, as 
a result of his renaming by Christ, the absolute wielder of power (in capite 
constitutus), both spiritual and jurisdictional as well as doctrinal and polit- 
ical. Valla contests this etymology as a grammarian (grammaticus): he 
highlights the discourse’s pseudo-ecclesial and Constantinian ideology by 
subjecting its text to an analytical and philological investigation. This is 
Valla’s method throughout the Oration, and indeed it is a constant across 
his entire literary production. By means of grammatical analysis and a 
critical-historical investigation into the authenticity and/or inauthentic- 
ity of the vis verborum, Valla proceeds, to the extent possible, to the truth 
of the vis rerum. 
Let us briefly sum up what has come to light in our investigation of sec- 
tion IV of the Oration. Valla’s philological analysis of the Constitutum and 
the Legenda Silvestri helped him to locate the roots of the “Constantinian 
Church” and its corresponding ecclesiology as well as the point from 
which they sprouted theoretically and practically in all their breadth. He 
finds them in an historical space and ideological and linguistic semiosis, 
which on the whole turn out to be inauthentic inasmuch as they subvert 
the original, evangelical ecclesia of ancient Christianity. Valla uses his phil- 
ological analysis to expose their roots and attack them there. Little by little 
he highlights how the sum of their historical praxis and ecclesiological 
language is in and of itself one giant contradiction. Indeed, it is based on 
the extreme and absolutely irresolvable antinomy between evangelium 
and imperium. Ultimately, Valla concludes that the entire theoretical and 
historical development of Constantinian ecclesiology, together with the 
whole theocratic, imperial tradition of the papacy, is a “deception” of such 
146 Nancy Struever, “Fables of Power,” Representations 4 (1983): 108-127. 


[PDF page 121]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 101 
enormous proportions that it results in an almost total subversion of the 
Gospel and of original Christianity. The final lines of section IV thus serve 
as both a concise summation of the section and an opening strike for 
the next (section V): 
Let these points be made, so that no one may wonder why many popes were 
unable to grasp that the Donation of Constantine was a forgery, even though 
in my opinion this deception originated with one of them.47 
7. SECTION V: FROM THE PACTUM HLUDOVICIANUM TO THE RESPUBLICA 
ROMANA; VALLA’S ANTI-CAESARISM IN OPPOSITION TO AUGUSTINE 
In section V Valla deals with the Pactum Hludovicianum. Although admit- 
ting its historical authenticity, he gradually scrapes away the layers of its 
juridical and canonical validity until it flakes off into a flurrying mass of 
contradictions. Once again, Valla employs his usual method: he focuses 
his historico-critical analysis on the internal antinomies which make up 
the textual structure of the Hludovicianum. Then he turns to the historical 
and pseudo-juridical consequences resulting from the ratification of the 
so-called Pactum. 
Let us consider, for example, Valla’s analysis of its formulas for the 
oaths sworn by the emperors upon their coronation at the hands of the 
Roman popes, a practice still alive and well in his own day. This reference 
to imperial oaths provides the point of departure for Valla’s argument 
across the whole of section V: 
‘But, you say, ‘why do the emperors not deny the Donation of Constantine, 
since it worked to their detriment, instead of acknowledging, affirming, and 
preserving it?’ Substantial point — marvelous defense! But which emperor 
are you talking about? If you mean the Greek, who was the true emperor, 
I shall deny the admission, but if you mean the Latin, I shall gladly admit it. 
For who is unaware that the Latin emperor was gratuitously installed by a 
supreme pontiff, Stephen [Stephen II, 752-757] (I believe)? He stripped the 
power of the Greek emperor because he would not come to the aid of Italy, 
and he named a Latin one, with the result that the emperor received more 
from the Pope than the Pope from the emperor. To be sure, Achilles 
and Patroclus divided up the treasures of Troy according to certain arrange- 
ments among themselves alone. The words of Louis [Louis the Pious, 
814-840] seem to me to point to this sort of thing, when he says ... 
147 Valla, De falso, 154.7-155.2 (81): “Hec dicta sint, ut nemo miretur, si donationem 
Constantini commenticiam fuisse pape multi non potuerunt deprehendere, tam et si ab 
aliquo eorum ortam esse hanc fallaciam reor.’ 


[PDF page 122]
102 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Hereupon follows the text of the Hludovicianum (as found in Gratian’s 
Decretum, Dist. LXIII, cap. 30), which is glossed in the margin of the 
Oration as “The text of Emperor Louis’ pact with Pope Paschal [Paschal I, 
817-824 ].”148 
Valla’s reply to the arguments of his imaginary interlocutor, who 
defends the Constantinian right of the papacy, develops against the back- 
ground of what we could call the praxis of the pseudo-Constitutum’s his- 
torical use and the curial theorization of that praxis. Let it suffice to recall 
here the writings of a pope like Innocent III, to whom Valla refers explic- 
itly and implicitly throughout the Oration: specifically the bull Per venera- 
bilem of 1202, in which the papacy, acting on its own authority, transfers 
the “Roman Empire” from the Greeks to the Germans in the person of 
Charlemagne, and his Sermo de sancto Silvestro, a peculiarly Innocentian 
interpretation of how the pseudo-donation occurred.!*9 
7.1. The Hludovicianum and the “Transfer of the Empire” 
(translatio imperii) 
The pope transfers the empire to the Latin emperor on the authority of the 
pseudo-Donation. In exchange the neo-Latin emperor swears “to confess 
and reconfirm him by perpetuating” the pseudo-Constantinian imperial 
act. Behold, Valla comments, underlining the historical and juridical 
absurdity, how the pope and emperor “divide up” the Roman empire (like 
Achilles and Patroclus with the spoils of Troy). It is a vicious circle: the 
pope creates the emperor, and the emperor repays him by reproposing 
the Constantinian act of donation, by virtue of which the pope then 
actualizes the “transfer of the empire”! This means, according to Valla, that 
148 Thid., 155.4-156.5 (82) and Setz’s notes: “At, dicitis, ‘cur imperatores, quorum detri- 
mento res ista cedebat, donationem Constantini non negant, sed fatentur, affirmant, con- 
servant?’ Ingens argumentum, mirifica defensio! Nam de quo tu loqueris imperatore? Si de 
Greco, qui verus fuit imperator, negabo confessionem, sin de Latino, libenter etiam con- 
fitebor: etenim quis nescit imperatorem Latinum gratis factum esse a summo pontifice, ut 
opinor, Stephano? qui Grecum imperatorem, quod auxilium non ferret Italie, privavit 
Latinumque fecit, ita ut plura imperator a papa quam papa ab imperatore acciperet. Sane 
Troianas opes quibusdam pactionibus soli Achilles et Patroclus inter se partiti sunt. Quod 
etiam mihi videntur indicare Ludovici verba, cum ait ....” Valla’s marginal manuscript 
heading (156.6.): “Verba pactionis Lodoici imperatoris cum Papa Paschale.” 
149 The Sermo de sancto Silvestro can be found in PL 217:481-484 (= Sermo VII. In festo 
d. Silvestri pontificis maximi); it is referred to by Martini, “Regale Sacerdotium,” 141. It is 
difficult to prove that Valla knew Innocent’s text, but a comparative reading of section IV 
of the Oration and the Sermo shows that the same nodal points of the Constitutum /Legenda 
Silvestri are highlighted in each, and that from them the pope and Valla reach diametrically 
opposed conclusions. It seems as if Valla intends his critical and historico-philological 
analysis as a direct, point-for-point response to Innocent III’s Sermo. 


[PDF page 123]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 103 
the negotiation between pope and neo-emperor is rather a pact of “collu- 
sion” meant to appropriate the Roman empire for themselves. What is 
more, this “pact” was agreed upon in contempt of every norm of civil 
(Justinianic) law. Thus what we have is a legal absurdity contracted by 
parties who ought to have been the guarantors of civil law. The parties 
(the pope and emperor) to this negotiation-collusion, therefore, which 
was effected against all civil and natural law, ought to have paid the pen- 
alty stipulated by Roman law for “forgers”: capital punishment.!®° 
Similar to section I, where Valla made use of characters arguing diverse 
points of view, here he has the emperor Louis the Pious argue his own case 
and defend his behavior towards the pope. 
‘But what am I going to do?’ you say, ‘Shall I recover by armed force what the 
Pope is holding? But he has now become more powerful than I am. Shall 
I recover it by legal action? But my legal right is no more than he wants it to 
be. I did not come to the empire by inheritance, but by an agreement that if 
I wanted to be emperor I should make various promises to the Pope in 
return. Shall I say that Constantine gave away nothing of his empire? In that 
way I would be making a case for the Greek emperor and would be cheating 
myself of all imperial rank. The Pope's rationale in making me emperor is 
that I am, as it were, his vicar, and if I fail to make promises he will not do 
this, and if I fail to obey he will depose me. As long as he gives to me, I shall 
admit to anything, I will agree to anything. Only believe me — if I actually 
owned Rome and Tuscany, I would not be acting as I am now. Paschal would 
be chanting in vain the tune of the Donation, since I consider it a forgery. It is 
not my business to look into the legal rights of the Pope, but it is the business 
of the emperor of Constantinople. 
You are altogether forgiven in my eyes, Louis, and every other ruler in 
your position.1>! 
This is the tone of the emperor’s self-defense in justification of the Pactum 
Hludovicianum. And Valla’s reference to the pseudo-Constitutum’s 
150 Valla, De falso, 156.16-157.7 (82), with Setz’s commentary and notes. 
151 [bid., 157.7-158.6 (82-83): “Sed quid faciam, inquies, ‘repetam armis, que papa occu- 
pat? At ipse iam factus est me potentior. Repetam iure? At ius meum tantum est quantum 
ille esse voluit. Non enim hereditario nomine ad imperium veni, sed pacto, ut si imperator 
esse volo hec et hec invicem pape promittam. Dicam nihil donasse ex imperio Constantinum? 
At isto modo causam agerem Greci imperatoris et me omni fraudarem imperii dignitate. 
Hac enim ratione papa se dicit facere imperatorem me quasi quendam vicarium suum et, 
nisi promittam, non facturum et, nisi paream, me abdicaturum. Dummodo mihi det, omnia 
fatebor, omnia paciscar. Mihi tamen crede, si Romam ego ac Tusciam possiderem, tantum 
abest, ut facerem que facio, ut etiam frustra mihi Pascalis donationis — sicut reor false - 
caneret cantilenam. Nunc concedo, que nec teneo nec habiturum esse me spero. De iure 
pape inquirere non ad me pertinet, sed ad Constantinopolitanum illum Augustum.’ 
Iam apud me excusatus es Ludovice, et quisquis alius princeps es Ludovici similis’ 
(emphasis added). 


[PDF page 124]
104 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
historical impact on the transaction between pope and emperor could not 
have been more to the point. 
The emperor articulates his self-defense in a series of motives that can 
all be reduced to three basic reasons. The first is that according to the 
Constitutum the pope has, as a matter of fact, the power to appoint the 
Western emperor. It is thus from the pope that the emperor, once elected 
and crowned, derives his imperial power. This power, then, is nothing 
other than a participation in papal power, and it subsists only when acting 
as the vicariate of that power. Consequently, the emperor of the West, 
precisely because he is the imperial vicar of the Roman pontiff, will never 
be able to contest the power of the papacy. For that power is the founda- 
tion and the source for the emperor’s own (vicariate) power. Therefore, if 
the emperor of the West attacks papal power, he necessarily erodes the 
very foundation of his own imperial power. 
Hence the second plank of the self-defense. The emperor's right extends 
only so far as conceded and accorded to by the pope. Indeed, the founda- 
tions of imperial right are exactly those laid by the will of the papacy. 
Therefore, if the emperor should cease to be the vicar of the pope, the lat- 
ter would immediately depose him: “The Pope’s rationale in making me 
emperor is that I am, as it were, his vicar, and if I fail to make promises he 
will not do this, and if I fail to obey he will depose me.’ 
The third and final part of the emperor's self-defense is the most con- 
vincing justification of his behavior. I should contest the Donation of 
Constantine, Valla has Louis say, but that would mean taking up the 
defense of the Eastern emperor — my direct antagonist — against the 
papacy. To contest the historical reality of the donation would affect 
the Emperor of Constantinople and not me, for I have received the empire 
by the election and power of the pope! Of course I think the Donation is 
fake, but to triumph with this position I would already have to be in pos- 
session of Rome; I would have to be emperor as a direct successor to 
Constantine. If such were the case, I would not “admit to anything.” Nor 
would “I agree to anything,” and the Roman pontiff “would be chanting in 
vain the tune of the Donation.’ 
For Valla, the juridical absurdity of the Pactum Hludovicianum is the 
historical constant that subtends every transaction between the Roman 
papacy and the German empire. This absurdity is manifested most clearly 
in the transaction par excellence: the pope’s crowning of the emperor. 
Indeed, papal coronation of the emperor — in its investiture ceremonial, in 
the emperor's oath, in the pope’s intentions — had continued unchanged 
for centuries. Since the pope's investiture of the emperor was based on 


[PDF page 125]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 105 
exactly the same juridical pretensions that underpinned the papacy, it 
had always been constitutionally invalid and juridically contradictory. 
Such was still the case in Valla’s own time: 
What must we suspect about the agreements that other emperors have 
made with supreme pontiffs, when we know what Sigismund [1410-1437] 
did, an otherwise excellent and very courageous man, and yet less coura- 
geous under the impact of his age? We saw him [keep in mind Valla’s sojourn 
during that period in Milan'®?] in Italy encompassed by just a few retainers 
and living from day to day, about to die of starvation in Rome if Eugenius had 
not given him food — but at the price of extorting the Donation. When he had 
come to Rome to be crowned emperor of the Romans, he could not have 
been crowned by the Pope [Eugenius IV, 1431-1447] without acknowledging 
the validity of the Donation of Constantine and making a donation of every- 
thing all over again.!°3 
After placing the Pactum Hludovicianum in its effective historical context, 
Valla penetrates further to its specifically juridical meaning in relation- 
ship to the pseudo-donation. He focuses ever more closely on its juridical 
aspect in order to bring to light the mass of contradictions of which the 
Pactum had been the bearer. Ultimately he lays bare a dense synchronicity 
of historical factors and juridical elements in conflict with one other, thus 
exposing the document’s intrinsic contradictoriness and therefore its 
structural non-validity and juridical falsity. 
If indeed, Valla says, the donation of the empire to the papacy were 
historically true, there would have been nothing left for Constantine’s 
eventual successor in the West. The resulting paradox is that the newly 
(papally) elected (German) emperor of the West is bound to reconfirm, 
and even to reiterate, Constantine’s act of donating the empire to the 
papacy. He must donate something that he does not yet possess but that 
he will obtain by means of his late election by the pope! Even more para- 
doxical, the very newly (papally) elected (German) emperor must reiter- 
ate Constantine’s act in order to reconfirm and reconstitute the papacy’s 
152 [Sigismund received the iron crown of Lombardy in Milan on 25 November 1431, 
after which he entered into negotiations with Eugenius IV to be crowned Holy Roman 
Emperor. Eds. ] 
153 Valla, De falso, 158.616 (83), and Setz’s notes: “Quid de aliorum imperatorum cum 
summis pontificibus pactione suspicandum est, cum sciamus quid Sigismundus fecerit, 
princeps alioquin optimus ac fortissimus, sed iam affecta etate minus fortis? quem per 
Italiam paucis stipatoribus septum in diem vivere vidimus, Rome etiam fame periturum, nisi 
eum — sed non gratis, extorsit enim donationem — Eugenius pavisset. Is enim cum Romam 
venisset, ut pro imperatore Romanorum coronaretur, non aliter a papa coronari potuit, 
quam Constantini donationem ratam haberet eademque omnia de integro donaret’ (empha- 
sis added). 


[PDF page 126]
106 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
power to create the Western emperor. And it was this very power that the 
pope, according to his claim, had received from Constantine with the 
Constitutum! Finally — and here we arrive at the height of juridical absur- 
dity in this case — the papacy bases on the Donation its claim to the right 
and the power of imperial election and coronation. But electing and 
crowning the emperor in Rome are the sole and exclusive right of the 
respublica romana and, more precisely, of the Senate and the People of 
Rome. Valla writes: 
What is more contradictory than for someone to be crowned a Roman 
emperor when he had renounced Rome itself? And to be crowned by a man 
whom he acknowledges and, to the extent it lies with him, makes the lord of 
the Roman empire? And to consider valid a donation which becomes true 
only if the emperor has nothing left of his empire? In my view, not even 
children would have done such a thing. So it is hardly surprising if the Pope 
takes upon himself the coronation of a Caesar, which ought to be the respon- 
sibility of the Roman people. If you, Pope, can deprive the Greek emperor of 
Italy and the western provinces and create the Latin emperor, why do you 
make use of agreements? Why do you divide up Caesar’s property? Why do 
you transfer the empire to yourself? Therefore anyone who is called emperor 
of the Romans should know that in my judgment he is neither Augustus nor 
Caesar nor emperor if he lacks full power at Rome, and that if he makes no 
effort to recover the city of Rome he is clearly guilty of perjury. Those former 
Caesars — Constantine first among them — were not forced to take the oath 
by which today’s Caesars are bound. As far as human resources allowed, they 
would take away nothing from the size of the Roman empire and would zeal- 
ously augment it. But this is not why they were called Augusti, because they 
were supposed to augment the empire (as some [like Isidore and Accursius] 
think in their ignorance of Latin), for Augustus is called, so to speak, “sacred” 
from the gustatory habits of those avians that were customarily used in tak- 
ing the auspices .... Better for the supreme pontiff to be called Augustus, 
from augmenting, except that in augmenting his temporal resources he 
reduces his spiritual ones.1°4 
4 Tbid., 158.16-160.7 (83-84), and Setz’s notes: “Quid magis contrarium quam pro 
imperatore Romano coronari, qui Rome ipsi renuntiasset? et coronari ab illo, quem et con- 
fiteatur et, quantum in se est, dominum Romani imperii faciat? ac ratam habere donatio- 
nem, que vera si sit nihil imperatori de imperio reliqui fiat? Quod, ut arbitror, nec pueri 
fecissent. Quo minus mirum, si papa sibi arrogat Cesaris coronationem, que populi Romani 
esse deberet. Si tu, papa, et potes Grecum imperatorem privare Italia provinciisque occi- 
dentis et Latinum imperatorem facis, cur pactionibus uteris? cur bona Cesaris partiris? cur 
in te imperium transfers? Quare sciat, quisquis est, qui dicitur imperator Romanorum, me 
iudice se non esse nec Augustum nec Cesarem nec imperatorem, nisi Rome imperium 
teneat, et, nisi operam det, ut urbem Romam recuperet, plane esse periurum. Nam Cesares 
illi priores, quorum fuit primus Constantinus, non adigebantur iusiurandum interponere, 
quo nunc Cesares obstringuntur: se quantum humana ope prestari protest, nihil imminu- 
turos esse de amplitudine imperii Romani eamque sedulo adaucturos. Non ea re tamen 


[PDF page 127]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 107 
As pointed out by Setz in his magisterial commentary to Valla’s text, the 
italicized section of this passage is Valla’s explicit reference to the formula 
(ordo) of the oath that the new Western “Augustus” was bound to swear 
at his crowning by the pope. That formula for the emperor's oath to the 
papacy, already in force in the thirteenth century and still in use at 
the time of Valla’s writing in the fifteenth, was in reality supposed to be the 
reiterated, historical reconfirmation of the Pactum Hludovicianum’s pre- 
sumed legitimacy and validity. The papacy thus considered the Pactum in 
its turn as the witness to the pseudo-Constitutum’s historical truth and 
juridical validity. And thus we arrive back at the specific foundation of the 
ecclesiology and related political (civil, ecclesiastical, and territorial) 
praxis of the Constantinian tradition. 
Following Valla’s line of thought, it was this Constantinian ecclesiology 
and praxis that, thanks to the scholasticism and canon law of the time, 
had nearly achieved the status of dogma in Boniface VIII’s Unam Sanctam 
of 1302: 
So you see that the worse the supreme pontiff, the more he insists on defend- 
ing this donation. Such was Boniface the Eighth .... He writes about the 
Donation of Constantine and despoiled the king of France, whose very king- 
dom he decreed to have been and to be subject to the Roman church, just as 
if he had wanted to implement the Donation of Constantine. 
The formula for the emperor’s oath, which he was bound to swear in obe- 
dience to the pope as his candidate, did not just have its (pseudo-)juridical 
foundation in the Constitutum. It first and foremost took from that docu- 
ment the notion and the politics of the imperialism that was created by 
the Roman Caesars and brought to perfection by Constantine in the fourth 
century. Valla makes this point with an aside on classical syntagmas, 
which seems to be a mere erudite digression but actually serves as a prem- 
ise to what is argued later in the final pages of section V. At stake is the 
etymology of the word augustus as either coming “from augmenting tem- 
poral resources” (ab augendo temporalia) or as meaning “sacred, so to 
vocati Augusti, quod imperium augere deberent — ut aliqui sentiunt Latine lingue 
imperiti — est enim Augustus quasi ‘sacer’ ab avium gustu dictus, que in auspiciis adhiberi 
solebant .... Melius summus pontifex ab augendo Augustus diceretur, nisi quod, dum tem- 
poralia auget, spiritualia minuit” (emphasis added). 
155 Tbid., 160.7-161.4 (84), and Setz’s notes and commentary: “Itaque videas, ut quisquis 
pessimus est summorum pontificum, ita maxime defendende huic donationi incumbere, 
qualis Bonifacius octavus .... Hic et de donatione Constantini scribit et regem Francie pri- 
vavit regnumque ipsum, quasi donationem Constantini exequi vellet, ecclesie Romane 
fuisse et esse subiectum iudicavit ....’ 


[PDF page 128]
108 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
speak, from the gustatory habits of birds” (quasi ‘sacer’ ab avium gustu). 
Valla treats both etymologies as more or less philologically plausible; they 
are distinguishable only by their ideological charge. 
Valla insistently criticizes both the etymologist Isidore and the jurist 
Accursius as ignorant of “Latinity and elegance” (/atinitas atque elegantia). 
Both had made the imperial title Augustus derive directly from the verb 
augere (to augment), thus indicating that the primary duty of the emperor, 
as an augustus, was to extend (territorially) and to consolidate (politi- 
cally) the imperium of Rome. With this double valence of meaning, the 
imperial title was taken up by the papacy and later transferred along with 
the empire to the Western emperor. At his coronation, then, the emperor 
had to swear solemnly to the pope that he, as a new Augustus, “would take 
away nothing from the size of the Roman empire and would zealously 
augment it” — in line with the formula of the imperial oath quoted by Valla. 
Against Isidore’s interpretation (an etymology that might be original to 
him), Valla takes up a piece of classical elegantia according to which the 
lemmas augustus and sacer (sacred), whether said of a place or a person, 
are related. More precisely, he connects the imperial title (assumed for the 
first time by Octavian) to the immediate context from which it was taken: 
the divination of the augurs. In Suetonius’ biography of Octavian Augustus, 
which Valla follows on this point, the term augustus is said to come “from 
the increase or the movement or the gustatory habits of birds, as Ennius 
teaches.” Nevertheless, the semantic implications of Isidore and 
Accursius (much more reliable than Valla would have thought) had been 
established historically by the fact that the title of Augustus — which initially 
possessed a strong religious patina (like its Greek counterpart, sebastos) — 
came to be more and more associated with the enlargement (in extension) 
and the consolidation (in sovereignty and unification) of the empire. 
Valla’s attack on Isidore’s etymology is harshly critical and bitterly 
ironic: “Better for the supreme pontiff to be called Augustus, from aug- 
menting, except that in augmenting his temporal resources he reduces his 
spiritual ones.’ This philological observation is attuned to both the remote 
implications and the immediate consequences of the event (whether his- 
torically true or false) of the Constantinian donation. He accuses it of hav- 
ing led the papacy to the enlargement of its imperium in terms of temporal 
86 In addition to Setz’s note 438, see: Thesaurus Linguae Latinae (Leipzig: Teubner, 
1900-), vol. 2, augustus, 1379-1413, at 1379-1392; ibid., vol. 2, augur, 1363-1367; Alois Walde, 
Lateinisches etymologisches Worterbuch (Heidelberg: Carl Winter, 1910), augeo, 73, augur, 
73f.; Giannelli Mazzarino, Trattato di storia romana, 49. 


[PDF page 129]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 109 
extension — all to the detriment of its particular (evangelical) spiritual 
dimension. This was only made possible because the donation rewarded 
the papacy with imperial Rome. 
So the papacy could not effect the transfer of an empire that did not 
belong to it, since the donation of Constantine never occurred. And the 
German emperor could not swear to renew the donation, since nothing 
can be “reconfirmed” that never actually happened to begin with. Finally, 
both the Roman pope and the German emperor end up having been 
“deceived by the example of Constantine,” who with his gift of the empire 
to the papacy would have conferred something that did not belong to him. 
For he, just like the other Caesars before him, had come upon imperium 
illicitly. 
But, Roman pontiffs, what is the meaning of that anxiety of yours in demand- 
ing that the Donation of Constantine be confirmed by one emperor after 
another, unless you mistrust your own legal authority? But, as the saying 
goes, you are washing a brick. For that donation never existed, and what does 
not exist cannot be confirmed. Whatever the Caesars give, they do because they 
are deceived by the example of Constantine. They are unable to give the 
empire.187 
7.2. From imperium to respublica: The “Second Part” of Section V 
Up to this point in section V, Valla has discussed the Pactum Hludovicianum 
with special reference to its juridical non-validity. This non-validity, he 
argues, was derived from the historical inauthenticity of the Constitutum — 
itself demonstrated on historico-philological grounds in section IV, and on 
historico-theoretical grounds in section I. Furthermore, the Pactum’s non- 
validity highlighted how the papacy’s “transfer of the empire” to the 
German West had no foundation, either historically or juridically. 
Now Valla’s argumentation indicates a further and definitive turn in his 
spiral-shaped discourse. It can be best understood by recalling briefly the 
conclusions reached in section I. Throughout that section, Valla had con- 
centrated his argument on the impossibility of the fact of the donation. If 
it had actually occurred, it would have necessarily brought about a contra- 
diction between both the nature and the historical reality of (Roman and 
157 Valla, De falso, 161.6—12 (85): “Verum quid sibi vult ista vestra, pontifices Romani, sol- 
licitudo, quod a singulis imperatoribus donationem Constantini exigitis confirmari, nisi 
quod iuri diffiditis vestro? Sed laterem lavatis, ut dicitur, nam neque illa unquam fuit, et 
quod non est, confirmari non potest, et quicquid donant Cesares, decepti exemplo Constantini 
faciunt, et donare imperium nequeunt” (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 130]
110 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Constantinian) imperium, and the nature and the historical reality of 
evangelium (understood as the faith and practice of the early Christian 
community and Pope Sylvester’s evangelical vicariate of Christ). Therefore, 
the (real and ideological) historical dimensions of both Roman imperium 
and Christian evangelium demand that the Donation of Constantine be 
considered a factual impossibility. 
This assumption about the donation’s factual impossibility is now taken 
up again in what we can call the “second part” of section V. But here it is 
used to change, if not to invert, both what the donation signifies (its segno) 
and what it means (its senso) in Valla’s argument. What the donation sig- 
nifies is inverted, because its factual impossibility here becomes its real, 
historical possibility. What the donation means is inverted, because its 
referent is no longer the forger of the Constitutum (the Legend of Sylvester) 
but the shift to “Christian empire” that took place in the fourth century — 
the shift initiated by Constantine and completed by Theodosius I. 
Valla manages to change what the donation signifies — transforming its 
factual impossibility into its real, historical possibility — by hypothesizing 
for the sake of argument that Constantine’s donation to Pope Sylvester 
actually did occur. 
All right, let us suppose that Constantine gave and Sylvester was ... in pos- 
session .... What more can I grant you than to concede that what never 
existed and could not have existed, did exist?158 
But, Valla proceeds, if the donation was effectively actuated, it becomes 
an historical transaction against “divine” and “human law,” both for the 
emperor and for the pope. By divine law (ius divinum) Valla understands 
the Sacred Scriptures, the Torah, and the Gospel, as we shall see further on 
in his own terms. By human law (ius humanum) he understands the natu- 
ral law deriving from the distinguishing quality (in the animal world) of 
humanitas (humanity), as well as the law of nations, which also descends 
from the peculiar nature of humanitas. More precisely, the law of nations 
is a norm of inter-human relations that corresponds to the essence of 
humanitas and emerges in the historical process whereby human beings 
create the civitas. In that moment, man, who is an animal liberum (free 
animal), reaches his potential and achieves the status of an animal politi- 
cum (political animal). 
68 Tbid., 162.1-6 (86): “Age vero, demus Constantinum donasse Silvestrumque ... pos- 
sedisse .... Quid possum vobis magis dare, quam ut ea, que nec fuerunt nec esse potuerunt, 
fuisse concedam?” 


[PDF page 131]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 111 
To get the measure of divine law, Valla scans the Scriptures and runs 
through the history of salvation as found in the Old and New Testaments. 
To understand natural law and the law of nations, he reconsiders Roman 
history, from the republic to the empire. Valla does not argue by means of 
theoretical and philosophical analysis. That is, he does not use the analyti- 
cal methods of “philosophy,” as he defines the term. Rather, and in confor- 
mity with the procedure of rhetorical discourse, he unfolds his argument 
along the lines of explicitly historical considerations. His method is to 
rethink the history of salvation and the history of Rome as a unified 
whole.!9 
Valla’s discourse proceeds in short stints and makes direct reference to — 
indeed it mirrors — Augustine’s historical reflections in books IV and V of 
his City of God. This reference to Augustine was, incidentally, as unavoid- 
able for Valla as it is unmistakable for his readers. Indeed, Valla explicitly 
cites a particular passage of Augustine’s text. We shall have more to say 
about this later. For now let us consider the following. 
In books IV and V of the City of God, Augustine reflects on Roman his- 
tory from a Christian perspective. He is especially interested in the origins 
of the Republic and the formation of the Roman Empire. Augustine con- 
siders the following issues in particular: the evolution and/or fall of the 
republic in the context of its own ethical and political dimensions and 
also of diverse historical situations; the expansion of Roman rule and the 
transformation of the republic into an empire as a result of the military, 
territorial, and political conquest of other peoples; the Roman empire’s 
move towards Christianity with the coming of Constantine. His treat- 
ment, which comes from an historico-Christian standpoint, is highly origi- 
nal and critical, and it was just as formative for medieval ecclesiology. 
For Augustine, the territorial and political expansion of Rome, as well 
as the perverted imposition of its rule across the centuries up to the point 
of becoming an empire, are the result of a double order of factors. And 
although they are dissimilar — indeed they stand on opposite sides of good 
and evil — they nevertheless remain strictly complementary in the (both 
teleologically and theologically) “providential’ economics of history. 
According to one way of seeing things, Augustine attributes the expan- 
sion of Roman rule to the “pride” (superbia) and the “will to power” of the 
Roman people, which were sustained by military heroism and the desire 
159 Camporeale, “Lorenzo Valla. Repastinatio,” 222; idem, “Lorenzo Valla tra Medioevo e 
Rinascimento,’ passim (reprinted in idem, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controri- 
forma, 121-330 and translated in the present volume, 145-296). 


[PDF page 132]
112 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
for glory. The conquest and subjection of other peoples was initially 
imposed on the Romans by the necessity of self-preservation. But the 
republic’s later wars of conquest were also brought on, Augustine argues 
with a heavy tone of irony, by the specifically “Roman will’ to subdue the 
“injustice” of other peoples. Once conquered, they were then ruled and 
governed with “justice,” and thus they were made fit to participate, 
although always as subjects, in the Roman civitas. 
According to another way of seeing things — that is, from the “Christian” 
viewpoint of the “City of God” — Augustine retells the history of Rome along 
the dimensions of the economics of salvation. Here his markers are the 
divine order and the “providential” course of universal history and of 
Roman history in particular. Rome creates its empire in the sphere of the 
divine order — the order of God and of the Sacred Scriptures — and pursues 
its hidden end (telos) within the “salvific economics” of the coming of 
Christianity. This is the historical juncture at which the Roman empire of 
the pagan gods is transformed into the Roman empire of the Christian God. 
The Christian historical turn occurred in the fourth century, with the 
emperors Constantine and Theodosius. Constantine, after having con- 
verted to the Christian religion, “nevermore made supplications to 
demons, but adored the one and true God.” For this “he had a long reign 
and was the sole Augustus ruling over the entire Roman world.” Theodosius 
defeated the final resistance of the worshippers of pagan Rome, ordered 
the demolition of the temples and images of the idols, and reconstituted 
Roman law in favor of the religio catholica,!©° which had by then ascended 
to the status of the “one and true” religion of the empire. In return God 
rewarded him with a vast and unified “imperial rule.” With this encomi- 
astic exaltation of the fourth-century Christian turn and the advent of 
Constantine’s and Theodosius’s empire, Augustine brings his historico- 
“providential” reflection to a climax, wrapping it in highly charged terms.!®! 
7.3. From Valla to Augustine: The Critique of the City of God 
Valla contrasts his own reflection on Roman history with that of Augustine 
by means of a point-by-point critique. He begins with the fundamental 
premises of the City of God and continues through Augustine’s entire 
discourse. 
160 [L.e., the “Catholic religion,” but with the the understanding that catholicus connotes 
universality and orthodoxy. Eds. ] 
161 Cf. Peter Brown, Augustine of Hippo. A Biography (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1969), 287-328. 


[PDF page 133]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 113 
Before continuing further, it is necessary to clarify more precisely this 
observation on the comparison between Valla and Augustine. First of all, 
the comparison is here made within the context of Valla’s reading of 
Augustine (in this specific case, of the City of God) and thus according to 
the interpretation given by Valla to Augustine’s works (both in the Oration 
and in other writings, such as, for example, De libero arbitrio). Second, we 
cannot ignore the more or less evident fact that Valla’s critique of Augustine 
takes place on two levels. If on the one hand Valla calls into question the 
“providential” premise of Augustine’s historical vision, on the other he 
adopts Augustine's trenchant criticism of Rome and of Roman imperial 
expansion. Thus Valla’s reading of the City of God is at once one of consent 
and of dissent, but on different levels. On the historiographic level, the 
condemnation of Roman rule and power is accepted in nearly the same 
terms as in Augustine’s formulation. On the theological level, however, 
Augustine’s “providential’ resolution of Roman imperialism is rejected and 
substantially attacked. This resolution had subsequently been adopted 
and unduly expanded by scholastic theoreticians of so-called “just war,’ 
and Valla’s critique of Augustine is aimed equally at them. 
In Valla’s historiographic retrospective, there is no justification for the 
military and territorial expansion undertaken by Rome during its transfor- 
mation from republic to empire. This applies both to the political realm, 
in the domain of human law, and to the historical one, in its teleological 
and “providential” dimensions. Valla supports his position in the follow- 
ing ways. 
First, he argues that only a war for the defense of acommunity or a state 
has the possibility of being justified. If, however, a defensive war should 
turn into a war of conquest, and thus result in the rule (imperium) of 
another community or state, it would be transformed into an “injustice.” It 
would become unjust with regard to natural law and the law of nations as 
well as in relation to man as an animal liberum and animal politicum. 
Second, the origins of the empire and its expansion — from Caesar to 
Augustus, and thence to their successors down to Constantine — lie in the 
“oppression” and then definitive extinction of the Roman respublica, 
the civitas founded on the Senatus Populusque Romanus, the Senate and 
the Roman People. For Valla, when Rome became an empire, the original 
and authentic sense of what it meant to be Roman — Romanitas, the life of 
“free” men and “citizens” in a political community — disappeared forever. 
Finally, Augustine sees the coming of Constantine as the acme of 
Roman history. The Roman world achieves its “providential’ destiny and 
becomes the civilizational seedbed for the historical planting of the 


[PDF page 134]
114 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Christian religion. For Valla, however, the Constantinian “revolution” takes 
on a meaning of equal historical importance—but one that is diametri- 
cally opposed to that assumed by Augustine. His reasoning is as follows. In 
the fourth century, from Constantine to Theodosius and his immediate 
successors, the religio catholica takes on a particularly imperial aspect. 
There is one state and one universal juridical system in the Roman world, 
through which, on the one hand, Christianity becomes the supreme and 
statutory religion for the whole Roman Empire. On the other hand, the 
cult of the gods of Rome decays into a pagan superstition (superstitio gen- 
tilium) practiced by those “who,” according to the Theodosian Code, “impi- 
ously defile themselves with the error or the crime of a pagan rite.”!©* The 
result of all this, however, in Valla’s historical retrospective, was the rup- 
ture, if not the historical fall, of the Gospel and of the Community of 
Believers in Christ. 
Let us rephrase this in Valla’s own terms. As the rise of the empire was 
made possible by the Caesars’ suppression of the Roman respublica, thus 
the fourth-century construction of the Christian empire was enabled by 
the fall, or at least the demotion, of the evangelical ecclesia, i.e. of the 
respublica christiana. This historical fall brought with it the repudiation of 
primeval Christianity, which had been in accordance with its evangelical 
origins. Evangelium is the direct antithesis of any kind of imperium. And 
the Christian faith (fides), by its nature (just like every other religious or 
secular faith) cannot be imposed by legislative decree or by violating the 
human freedom of consent. Nor can it be sucked into the juridical and 
political quagmire of ruling by the use of force (imperare ac vim afferre), in 
whatever way that occurs. 
As stated earlier, Valla gives a further turn to his discourse in the second 
part (the final pages) of section V. He hypothetically accepts that the 
donation actually occurred, and he takes advantage of this hypothesis to 
proceed from the donation’s absolute (historical and theoretical) impos- 
sibility, as argued in section I, to its factual (real, historical) possibility in 
section V. The “cause” of Valla’s argument comes to signify something dif- 
ferent in the transition from section I to section V: it shifts from the abso- 
lute impossibility of the donation to its hypothetical possibility. It also 
changes its meaning, for the referent of the Constitutum is no longer the 
forger of the “document of donation,’ the fantastic and ahistorical Legenda 
Silvestri, but the fourth century of the Christian era. 
162 Codex Theodosianus XV1.x.21 — 20 August 399: “qui profano pagani ritus errore seu 
crimine polluntur.’ Cf. Storoni Mazzolani, Sant’Agostino e i pagani, u2ff. 


[PDF page 135]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 115 
Acutely grasping this new referential meaning of the Constitutum, Valla 
uses the tools of critical philology to tease out the more historical and 
authentic dimensions of the “document of donation.” Going well beyond 
the forging of the Constitutum, Valla rediscovers the real, historical roots 
of the “document.” That is, he finally penetrates to a context that is truer 
and more authentic, more properly befitting the Constitutum: he identifies 
the place where the ideological text was first composed and thus the his- 
torical moment of the founding of its ecclesiology. But now the “Donation 
of Constantine” — understood as the Constantinian revolution of the 
fourth century — is no longer a fabula, like the forger’s Legenda Silvestri or 
like the Lateran’s curial ideology. On the contrary, the “forged Donation of 
Constantine” is a proper historia: the Historia Ecclesiastica as recorded by 
Eusebius of Caesarea and Rufinus. 
Thus, in the final pages of the fifth section, as if rounding the last switch- 
back on the winding road of his argument, Valla’s Oration reaches its des- 
tination at the radical critique — at once philological and ecclesiological — 
of the conversion of the Roman Empire from paganism to Christianity. 
The Oration ends as a criticism and an outright rejection of the 
Constantinian shift, understood on the one hand as the historical fall of 
the Gospel and primeval Christianity, and on the other as the origin and 
foundation of Western Christianity by means of the “transfer of the 
empire” to the pope in Rome. Thus, moreover, the hypothesis about the 
Constitutum, which was assumed but never formally conceded, is trans- 
formed in the course of the argument into a statement regarding the real, 
historical effectuality of the fourth-century rise of the Constantinian 
Church. It is also transformed into an effective criticism of Constantinian 
ecclesiology, portrayed with its origins in the City of God and then as fully 
theorized and re-elaborated, in a more or less systematic and partially dis- 
tinct way, by scholastic theology and canon law. 
For the purposes of substantiating what has been said so far, let us carry 
out as precise an exegesis as possible of this part of the Oration, the final 
pages of section V. 
All right, let us suppose that Constantine gave and Sylvester was at one time 
in possession, but that later either he himself or one of his successors was 
removed from possession ... 
— thus Valla introduces his hypothesis about the donation’s factual possi- 
bility - 
Even so, I say that neither divine nor human law enables you to effect a 
recovery. 


[PDF page 136]
116 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
[1] In the Old Testament a Hebrew was forbidden to be a slave to a Hebrew 
for more than six years [Deut. 15:12], and also every fifty years everything 
returned to its original owner [Lev. 25:10ff.]; 
[2] In the age of grace shall a Christian be oppressed in eternal slavery by 
the vicar of Christ, who redeemed us from slavery? What should I say: will he 
be recalled to slavery [Gal. 2:4] after he has been made free and long enjoyed 
his freedom?}®3 
The final phrase (in italics) contains Valla’s most explicit statement on 
christiana libertas, which for him is the pivot on which the entire structure 
of the Oration hinges. It is from this point that it gains its force against the 
Donation of Constantine and the related ecclesial ideology developed by 
the papacy and scholasticism. Valla uses human and divine law to sub- 
stantiate this notion of freedom and to show its deepest foundations. 
As for divine law, he first cites the orders of the Torah: personal servitude 
of whatever kind had to be dissolved every sixth year, and every fiftieth 
year all property (in whatever way acquired) had to be returned to its origi- 
nal owner. The consequence is implicit but clear: even the “acceptance” of 
the Donation — whose authenticity was assumed for the sake of argument 
in section II — had to be subject to these Old Testament ordinances. 
Moving on to the divine law of the New Testament, which is fundamen- 
tally an economics of saving grace, Valla depicts the Donation in all its 
absurdity. The Donation is revealed to be the absolute negation of christi- 
ana libertas and to stand in extreme antithesis to Paul’s teaching in the 
Letter to the Galatians. By accepting the Donation of Constantine, the 
“vicar of Christ” ends up claiming a (spiritual and political) “slavery” for 
Christians “in the age of grace.” That is, in the age of the economics of sal- 
vation he would reduce Christians to the (spiritual and political) subjec- 
tion of a slave — after they had been redeemed and returned to freedom by 
Christ himself: “he has been made free and long enjoyed his freedom.” 
Whence flow the historical consequences of the papal and Roman 
“priesthood’s” “barbaric” exercise of power and rule: 
I keep quiet about how savage, how violent, how barbarous the domination 
of priests often is. If this was unknown previously, it has recently been 
163 Valla, De falso, 162.1-14 (86): “Age vero, demus Constantinum donasse Silvestrumque 
aliquando possedisse, sed postea vel ipsum vel aliquem successorum a possessione deiec- 
tum .... Tamen dico vos nec iure divino nec iure humano ad recuperationem agere posse. 
[1] In lege veteri Hebreus supra sextum annum Hebreo servire vetabatur, et quinquag- 
esimo quoque anno omnia redibant ad pristinum dominum; 
[2] tempore gratie Christianus a vicario Christi, redemptoris nostre servitutis, premetur 
servitio eterno? quid dicam, revocabitur ad servitutem, postquam liber factus est diuque 
potitus libertate?” (empasis added) [translation modified]. 


[PDF page 137]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 117 
recognized from that depraved monster, Giovanni Vitelleschi, cardinal and 
patriarch, who wearied the sword, by which Peter had cut off the ear from 
Malchus, with the blood of Christians. This is the sword by which he too died.164 
This “domination of priests” then deteriorated into an absolute “tyranny” 
over the Christian community. As a result the priesthood lost all the apos- 
tolic authority and the status as vicariate of Christ to which it had been 
ordained. It follows that such a priesthood could be deposed or repudi- 
ated by the Christian community in the name of the Gospel: 
Did the people of Israel truly have permission to revolt from the house of 
David and Solomon, whom prophets sent by God had anointed, because 
their burdens were overwhelming? Did God approve what they did [cf. 1 
Kings, 12:24], while we in the face of such tyranny will not have permission to 
revolt, especially from those who are not kings and cannot be, and from 
those who were shepherds of sheep — that is, of souls — and have become 
thieves and robbers | cf. John 10:1f.]?1®° 
Having completed his critique of the Donation and of Constantinian 
ecclesiology in the light of divine law (the Torah and the Gospel), Valla 
turns to discussing the Donation and its corresponding ecclesiastical ide- 
ology on the basis of human law: 
To turn to human law, who is unaware that there is no legal right conferred by 
war, or, if there is, it has force only so long as you are in possession of what you 
gained by war? For when you lose possession, you have lost your legal claim. 
That is why no one customarily goes to court to recover captive prisoners if 
they have escaped. The same is true of booty, if the former owners have recov- 
ered it. Bees and certain other kinds of flying creatures cannot be recovered if 
they have flown away a considerable distance from my private property and 
settled in someone else’s [cf. Dig. 43,1,3]. When it comes to human beings — not 
only free creatures but masters over others — will you try to reclaim through legal 
action those who have asserted their freedom by force and weapons, just as a 
person would do to reclaim his cattle, and not by force and weapons?! 
164 Tbid., 162.14-163.2 (86) and Setz’s note 448: “Sileo, quam sevus, quam vehemens, 
quam barbarus dominatus frequenter est sacerdotum. Quod si antea ignorabatur, nuper 
est cognitum ex monstro illo atque portento Ioanne Vitellesco cardinale et patriarcha, qui 
gladium Petri, quo auriculam Malcho abscidit, in christianorum sanguine lassavit, quo gla- 
dio et ipse periit” (emphasis added). With his reference to John 18:10, Valla seems to portray 
Vitelleschi’s death as the fulfillment of Christ’s words to Peter. 
165 Tbid., 163.3-9 (86): “An vero populis Israel a domo David et Salomonis, quos proph- 
ete a Deo missi unxerant, tamen propter graviora onera desciscere licuit factumque eorum 
Deus probavit: nobis ob tantam tyrannidem desciscere non licebit? ab iis presertim, qui nec 
sunt reges nec esse possunt et qui de pastoribus ovium, id est animarum, facti sunt fures et 
latrones” (emphasis added). 
166 [bid., 163.10-20 (87): “Et ut ad ius humanum veniam, quis ignorat nullum ius esse bel- 
lorum aut, si quod est, tam diu valere quandiu possideas, que bello parasti? Nam cum 


[PDF page 138]
118 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
First, Valla maintains that no right of possession or rule, either territorial 
or political, can be legitimately derived from a “war of conquest.” Second, 
assuming — but not conceding (a point he will take up later) — that such 
a right could obtain, no one can claim, for the purposes of restoring to 
himself, a possession or rule at one time acquired by force (“what you 
gained by war”) and now lost. Indeed, if the right of emancipation and re- 
acquisition of personal autonomy is valid for brute animals, it will be all 
the more valid for human beings. Now, the papacy’s claims to the restora- 
tion of its long-lost rule over the peoples of the Western empire (“human 
beings — not only free creatures but masters over others — who have 
asserted their freedom by force and weapons’) entail the utter subversion 
of the right of emancipation, especially since that restoration is claimed 
precisely “as a right” as provided by Constantine’s donation (“just as a per- 
son [the Pope] would do to reclaim his cattle [human beings]”). 
Valla continues: 
Nor can you say to me: “The Romans justly waged war upon nations, and they 
Justly deprived them of liberty.” 
Do not bring me into that debate, lest I be compelled to speak against my 
fellow Romans. Yet no crime could have been so serious as to warrant peoples’ 
everlasting slavery, since they have often waged wars through the fault of a 
leading man or some great citizen in the respublica and then, after being 
defeated, were undeservedly penalized with slavery. The world is full of exam- 
ples of this sort of thing.1©” 
At this point the Oration takes the form of a series of conflicting arguments 
enunciated by the principle interlocutors, who again act in the guise of dra- 
matis personae. One part is played by the pope, who appeals to the Donation 
of Constantine to claim his territorial and political rule as a right; the other 
by the “orator” — Valla himself — who as a “citizen of Rome” contests the 
pope’s pseudo-right as baseless. Indeed, he denounces it as a usurpation in 
possessionem perdis, et ius perdidisti. Ideoque captivos, si fugerint, nemo ad iudicem 
repetere solet, etiam nec predas, si eas priores domini receperint. Apes et quedam alia 
volucrum genera, si e privato meo longius evolaverint et in alieno desederint, repeti non 
queunt: tu homines, non modo liberum animal, sed dominum ceterorum, si se in libertatem 
manu et armis asserant, non manu et armis repetes, sed iure, quasi tu homo sis, illi pecudes?” 
(emphasis added). 
167 Tbid., 163.20-164.8 (87) and Setz’s commentary: “Neque est quod dicas: ‘Romani iuste 
bella nationibus intulerunt iusteque libertate illas exuerunt. 
Noli me ad istam vocare questionem, nequid in Romanos meos cogar dicere, quanquam 
nullum crimen tam grave esse potuit, ut eternam mererentur populi servitutem, cum eo, quod 
sepe culpa principis magni ve alicuius in re publica civis bella gesserunt et victi immerita 
servitutis pena affecti sunt. Quorum exemplis plena sunt omnia” (emphasis added) [trans- 
lation modified]. 


[PDF page 139]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 119 
violation of the right, guaranteed by natural law and the law of nations 
(and first and foremost of “Roman citizens”), to natural and civil liberty. 
To the orator’s denial of legitimacy, in the name of human law, to any 
“war of conquest,” the pope, as heir to the empire, responds with 
Augustine’s “justification” of Rome's subjection of peoples: “the Romans 
justly waged war upon nations, and they justly deprived them of liberty.” 
As Setz has noted, this is a reference to book IV, chapter 15 of Augustine’s 
City of God (Setz has also noted that this passage is used by Gratian in the 
Decretum, C. XXII q. 2.).!68 It seems worthwhile to dig deeper into the 
meaning and the implications of this reference to Augustine, a reference 
introduced as the objection of Valla’s dramatic antagonist, the pope. 
We should first observe that the phrase, “the Romans justly waged war 
upon nations ...”), is not a precise quotation but rather an abbreviated 
formulation of what Augustine said in book IV (chapters 1-15) of the City 
of God. What is more, although the phrase is a deduction based on what 
Augustine wrote, it should have been precluded by Augustine’s state- 
ments to the contrary in chapter 14 of the very same book. For Augustine 
offers no defense whatsoever for the theoretical or actual lawfulness of the 
“war of conquest.” In point of fact, he writes eloquently and profoundly 
against it. He condemns all types of war in favor of the most peaceful 
cohabitation possible among peoples and cities (for example, in chapter 7 
of book XIX of the City of God). On the contrary, Augustine considers the 
“justification” of the wars of conquest of the Romans in particular, who 
were forced to conquer and rule other peoples on account of those peo- 
ples’ injustice. Indeed, the Romans could not otherwise have defended 
their own respublica founded on law and freedom, nor would it have been 
possible to extend to the barbarian peoples Roman “justice” and “law,” the 
bases of civil and political freedom and thus of romana libertas. Thus the 
Roman empire sprang from the will to justice and freedom. Its expansion 
was the inevitable product of its victories, of “good fortune,’ and of the 
destiny of the city of Rome. For into the Roman empire’s progressive jour- 
ney Augustine inscribes the “providential,’ divine plan for the coming of 
Christianity. 
Augustine concedes, however, that it would have been better had the 
empire never existed. He would have preferred for concord among peo- 
ples to have permitted a multiplicity, even of various forms, of autono- 
mous and free kingdoms and cities, communities and states, none subject 
to another. But such was not permitted by the goddess “Injustice,” who 
168 [bid., 164, n. 455. 


[PDF page 140]
120 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
held sway among the enemy peoples hostile to Rome. For their part, the 
Romans were constrained almost by necessity —- whether considered 
in the light of their own common good or that of the enemy peoples 
themselves — to conquer and rule other cities and nations, all for the pur- 
pose of endowing them with Roman justice. 
Augustine’s premises, when developed by Gratian’s canon law and the 
political thought of scholasticism, had led to the thesis of “just war.’ Valla 
critiques these premises minutely, then, in order to combat the theory of 
“just war” at its root. First, he argues that Rome’s expansionist wars were 
not provoked by the hostilities of other peoples towards the Romans. The 
true reasons for which the Romans waged wars of conquest are to be found 
solely in “the fault of a leading man or some great citizen in the respublica.’ 
Valla, it is true, declares his intention not to overstep the bounds of his- 
torical analysis: “do not bring me into that debate, lest I be compelled to 
speak against my fellow Romans.” But this suspension of judgment is 
purely formal. It is a rhetorical figure that actually functions to highlight 
his own personal judgment. For Valla — and these are his own terms — no 
matter why Rome’s wars (defensive or offensive) were waged and eventu- 
ally won, they should never have led to the rule and subjection of con- 
quered peoples. Nevertheless this is what happened, against the right of 
nations: “no offense could have been so serious as to warrant peoples’ 
everlasting slavery.” 
Furthermore, Valla’s formal reluctance to universally condemn Roman 
military expansionism allows him to emphasize better the real reasons 
that, according to his historical reflection, underlie the truer origins of the 
wars of conquest and the subsequent rule over other peoples: “they have 
often waged wars through the fault of a leading man or some great 
[Roman] citizen in the respublica and then, after being defeated, were 
undeservingly penalized with slavery.” The origins, therefore, of Rome’s 
expansionism, of the foundation of the empire, and of the subjection of 
other peoples, are for Valla to be found in the power acquired within the 
civitas romana itself by historically identifiable “leading men” and “great 
citizens.’ This power was assumed in opposition to the Senatus Populusque 
Romanus and was therefore subversive of the respublica and of civil lib- 
erty. So, the subjection of peoples to the rule of Rome, and their resulting 
loss of autonomy and civil liberty, were the direct political and historical 
consequences of the subjection and destruction of the Roman republic. It 
remains only to observe the historical reprisal of the law of nature itself, 
which makes itself felt every time that law is broken by the violence of 
power and rule. 


[PDF page 141]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 121 
Valla now elevates his discourse on the history of Rome to the theoreti- 
cal level in order to incorporate further support for his personal judgment 
of the city’s military and political expansion: 
Nor in truth is it assured by the /aw of nature that one people subjugate another. 
We can instruct others and persuade them. We cannot rule over them using 
force, unless, abandoning our humanity, we want to imitate the wilder beasts 
which impose their bloody imperium upon the weaker, as the lion upon 
quadrupeds, the eagle upon birds, and the dolphin upon fish. But even these 
creatures do not make claims upon their own kind, but upon lesser breeds. 
We ought to do this all the more, and a man should scrupulously respect 
another man, since as Quintilian said, “no creature on earth is so fierce that it 
does not revere the likes of itself” [ps.-Quintilian, Declamatio XII.27].1® 
Valla had written above that there is no baser crime than the subjection of 
a community or a people. In the passage cited here, he reaffirms that it is 
a crime against nature to subject a people to one’s own rule and power, 
depriving it of political independence and civil liberty. It violates the spe- 
cific nature of humanitas. 
Valla’s discourse now takes the form of a clarification of the vast seman- 
tic range he finds in the term humanitas. Here he continues a point made 
in section I, where he quotes a relevant passage from Cicero’s De amicitia 
(13,48). For Valla, the meaning of humanitas can be understood by reflect- 
ing on the binary opposition between praecipere/exhortari (instructing/ 
persuading) and imperare/vim afferre (ruling/using force). This binary 
opposition evinces a contradiction between terms and correlative func- 
tions concerning the essence of humanitas: the first element (praecipere/ 
exhortari) is a requirement of humanity, while the second (imperare/vim 
afferre) is a negation and an annihilation of it. The two sides are utterly 
and mutually exclusive. 
It should be noted that persuasion, or exhortari (when practiced with 
fellow humans), is understood as an integral component of instructing, or 
praecipere. Thus Valla considers the art of rhetoric, as the technique or 
strategy of persuasion, to be the supreme art of human communication 
and learning. It is the (one and only) preferred instrument for transactions 
169 Tbid., 164.9—19 (88): “Neque vero lege nature comparatum est, ut populus sibi popu- 
lum subigat. Precipere aliis eosque exhortari possumus, imperare illis ac vim afferre non pos- 
sumus, nisi relicta humanitate velimus ferociores beluas imitari, que sanguinarium in 
infirmiores imperium exercent, ut /eo in quadrupedes, aquila in volucres, delphinus in 
pisces. Veruntamen he belue non in suum genus sibi ius vindicant, sed in inferius. Quod 
quanto magis faciendum nobis est et homo homini religioni habendus, cum, ut M. Fabius 
inquit, ‘nulla supra terras adeo rabiosa belua, cui non imago sua sancta sit” (emphasis 
added) [translation modified]. 


[PDF page 142]
122 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
on all levels in human relationships. The exercise of power over fellow 
human beings (imperare), on the other hand, is essentially an act of vio- 
lence (vim afferre). Without violence there is no power of rule, nor can 
there be any. And since every exercise of “human violence” is in itself 
(self)-destructive of man in his particular nature — “human violence” is an 
antinomy whose terms mutually deny each other — the use of violence on 
other human beings constitutes at the same time a transgression of human 
nature into the realm of animal brutality. Indeed, it is unworthy even of 
the animal kingdom. For there, violence and the power of rule are exer- 
cised not among beasts equal in kind but by superior ones on their inferi- 
ors: “the wilder beasts ... impose their bloody imperium upon the weaker, 
as the lion upon quadrupeds, the eagle upon birds, and the dolphin upon 
fish.” Let us not miss Valla’s biting irony here, which underlies his com- 
parison of behavior in the animal world with that found in the perverted 
relations of the human community. 
Valla’s examples are neither literary quotations nor erudite citations on 
the three species of fauna. They are an explicit reference to ancient impe- 
rial heraldry, still widely known today. The lion, the eagle, and the dolphin 
had always been the preferred emblems of imperial supremacy and rule, 
long before they were taken up (in Valla’s time and thereafter) by the great 
dynasties of Europe in their bid for the crown of the Holy Roman Empire. 
Imperial heraldry provides Valla with an extremely meaningful expres- 
sion of — and one perfectly apt to represent “emblematically” — the “bloody 
imperium’ of the pretenders to the throne.!7° 
Valla’s historical reflection establishes that the violence of power and 
domination (vim affere), within the human community, shows itself to be 
essential and intrinsic to imperare and a direct consequence of animaliza- 
tion and the loss of humanitas: “abandoning our humanity,” as his text 
reads. Against the historical reality that “man is a wolf to man” (homo 
homini lupus), Valla repeats the ethical and political imperative of the 
humanist perspective: “a man should scrupulously respect another man.” 
This is because, despite possible defects in humanitas proper, at either an 
individual or a collective level, man will never become a creature so fierce 
as to cease to “revere the likes of itself.” 
170 Cf. Pierio Valeriano, Hieroglyphica, (Lugduni [Lyon]: Sumptibus Pauli Frelon, 1602) 
(reprint = New York: Garland, 1976); and Percy Emst Schramm, Herrschaftszeichen und 
Staatssymbolik, 3 vols. (Stuttgart: Hiersemann, 1954-1956), sub vocibus. 
‘71 [The phrase “man is a wolf to man” (homo homini lupus) is a Roman commonplace 
first attested in Plautus, Asinaria, 495. Eds. | 


[PDF page 143]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 123 
Valla offered a similar treatment of the nature of man in relation to that 
of brute animals in the first book of his Repastinatio, which can be consid- 
ered a parallel passage to the Oration. There he defined that relationship 
according to cognitive and rational capacities, making the following 
points. A brute animal is a living being endowed with cognitive capacities; 
however, it is “mute and without speech.’ Man is a living creature capable 
of cognition that exists as a rational being and is distinguished by the 
peculiar quality of being the “creator of language.” Man, then, exists and 
differentiates himself in the animal kingdom not so much as an animal 
rationale (a “rational animal,’ according to the Aristotelian and scholastic 
conception) but properly and essentially as an animal loquens, a speaking 
animal.!72 
At the end of his treatment in the Repastinatio, and as a final proof for 
his definition of man, Valla cited the first chapter of the book of Genesis, 
where the Scripture says that man and woman were created by the divine 
word “in the image and likeness of God.” In section V of the Oration, when 
treating man as an animal liberum and, as such, as distinguished from 
brute animals, Valla cites not Genesis but his favorite Quintilian (for us, in 
this case, known to be pseudo-Quintilian). He takes his ethical and politi- 
cal concepts from the author of the Declamationes: “no creature on earth 
is so fierce that it does not revere the likes of itself.” As if compelled by his 
own method and the context of his argument, Valla seems to draw on the 
rhetorical literature of the Romano-Hellenistic world in order to further 
bolster and more clearly define his conception of humanitas. 
It is precisely within this conception of humanitas that Valla goes well 
beyond Augustine’s position (in favor of the Romans) and absolutely 
undermines any and all possible justification for wars of conquest aimed 
at rule. He denies and repudiates such a justification both on the ethical 
and political level and in the retrospective of historical events. His judg- 
ment on the historical processes of Roman expansionism in all time 
periods — from republican Rome to the empire of the Caesars to the con- 
temporary papacy — ends up being aimed against the polar opposite posi- 
tions of Augustine and his scholastic and medieval successors. In this 
sense Valla writes, following his citation of pseudo-Quintilian: 
There are therefore four reasons for making war: (1) to avenge a wrong and 
defend friends, (2) fear of incurring a disaster in the future if the strength of 
others is allowed to grow, (3) the expectation of booty, (4) a desire for glory. Of 
172 Camporeale, “Lorenzo Valla. Repastinatio,’ 225ff. 


[PDF page 144]
124 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
these the first is, to some extent, honorable, the second less so, and the last 
two in no way at all.!”3 
Beyond stating an ethical and political position, expressed here so clearly 
and firmly by Valla — and almost a prelude to Erasmus’ Dulce bellum inex- 
pertis (Adagia)'4 — this passage is meant to continue the critique of books 
IV and V of Augustine’s City of God. Valla begins by barely admitting the 
theoretical and political justifiability of wars for individual and collective 
defense, and then extending it, although with less authority, to similar 
defensive wars. Then he unleashes a firm condemnation on wars of con- 
quest of any kind, whether directed by strategies for expanding territorial 
and/or political rule, or motivated by the acquisition of riches and/or the 
ambition for power and glory. Hence Valla’s discourse proceeds: 
In fact wars were frequently launched against the Romans, but after they 
had defended themselves they waged wars against their enemies and others 
too, and no nation has come under their domination without being con- 
quered and subjected in war — how rightly or for what reason is theirs to know. 
I would not wish to condemn them for having fought unjustly, nor to acquit 
them for acting justly. Iwould only say that the Romans made war on others for 
the same reason as most peoples and kings, and that those who were attacked 
and conquered in war had the same license to defect from the Romans as they 
had from other masters, so that all authority not be assigned — something no 
one would accept — to the most ancient peoples, who were the first masters, 
in other words to those who first took away the property of others.!75 
Here, too, Valla observes his formal dictum: to suspend all value judg- 
ments regarding Rome’s wars on other peoples. And he repeats here what 
was said above in nearly the same exact terms. Valla does not want to 
speak about the “justice” or “injustice” of Roman wars of conquest. 
73 Valla, De falso, 164.19-165.2 (88): “Itaque quattuor fere cause sunt, ob quas bella infer- 
untur. [1] aut 0b ulciscendam iniuriam defendendosque amicos, [2] aut timore accipiende 
postea calamitatis, si vires aliorum augeri sinantur, [3] aut spe prede, [4] aut glorie cupidi- 
tate. Quarum prima nonnihil honesta, secunda parum, due posteriores nequaquam honeste 
sunt” (emphasis added). 
74 See Desiderius Erasmus, Adagia. Sei saggi politici in forma di proverbi, ed. Silvana 
Seidel Menchi (Torino: Einaudi, 1980), 195-295 (Latin text with facing Italian translation), 
with the introduction and commentary by Seidel Menchi. 
WS Valla, De falso, 165.314 (88): “Et Romanis quidem illata fuere frequenter bella, sed, 
postquam se defenderant, et illis et aliis ipsi intulerunt, nec ulla gens est, que dicioni 
eorum cesserit nisi bello victa et domita, quam recte aut qua causa ipsi viderint. Eos ego 
nolim nec damnare tanquam iniuste pugnaverint, nec absolvere tanquam iuste. Tantum 
dicam eadem ratione Romanos ceteris bella intulisse qua reliqui populi regesque, atque ipsis, 
qui bello lacessiti victique sunt, licuisse deficere a Romanis, ut ab aliis dominis defecerunt, ne 
forte, quod nemo diceret, imperia omnia ad vetustissimos illos, qui primi domini fuere, 
idest qui primi preripuere aliena, referantur” (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 145]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 125 
It will be useful to recall what this suspension of judgment actually 
means. On the one hand it underlies Valla’s critique of Augustine regard- 
ing the historical and “providential” justification of Rome’s destiny. On the 
other it operates as a rhetorical figure that actually emphasizes Valla’s 
historico-political criticism of Roman military expansionism. And this is 
the point to which he leads his discourse. 
Rome’s military and political expansionism had to result in its own 
defeat, which is exactly what happened. The very will to “justice” that had 
brought Rome, often in a self-serving way, to conquer and subject other 
peoples to its own rule eventually determined the revolt of the conquered 
against this subjection. Indeed, these peoples separated from Rome or 
rebelled against its rule in order to recover their original autonomy and 
civil and political freedom. They acted in accord with their right to free- 
dom as guaranteed by natural law and the law of nations — the freedom, in 
fact, of romana libertas, from which the republic itself had sprung. 
This is Valla’s historico-political assessment of the fall of the empire. 
Flavio Biondo — a humanist very close to Valla, who shared both his friend- 
ship and his study of ancient and modern Roman history — had pointed to 
the end of Rome’s universal rule as the definitive “decline of the Roman 
Empire” (inclinatio Romani imperii).’”° Valla turns Biondo’s vision of his- 
tory around, approaching the issue from the other side. The fall of the 
empire began with the political and military renewal and reemergence of 
its subject peoples and neighbors. The “Gothic” and “barbarian” peoples, 
once subjected to the rule of Rome, rise against Roman imperialism to 
claim and recover their lost autonomy and freedom, to impose — in place 
of the Roman versions — their own right and their own “justice.” 
But there is more, proceeds Valla, bringing his argument to a crescendo 
of fabulous effect: if the peoples’ claim to autonomy was fully legitimate 
with regard to the republic, even more so was the claim to liberty with 
regard to the empire of the Caesars and the Caesarism of Constantine, 
and, a fortiori, so is that against the Constantinian Caesarism adopted and 
embodied by the Roman papacy: 
176 [The title of Biondo’s history of medieval Italy and Europe was Historiarum ab incli- 
natione romani imperii decades (finished 1453), on which see Angelo Mazzocco, “Decline 
and Rebirth in Bruni and Biondo,’ in Paolo Brezzi and Maristella de Panizza Lorch (eds.), 
Umanesimo a Roma nel Quattrocento (Roma: Istituto di Studi Romani, 1984), 249-266; 
Denys Hay, “Flavio Biondo and the Middle Ages,’ Proceedings of the British Academy 45 
(1960): 97-128, reprinted in idem, Renaissance Essays (London: Hambledon, 1988), 32-66; 
and Riccardo Fubini, “Biondo Flavio,’ Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani 10 (1968): 536-539. 
Eds. | 


[PDF page 146]
126 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
And yet the Roman people had a stronger claim over nations conquered in 
war than the emperors who demolished the Republic. Accordingly, if it was 
right for nations to revolt from Constantine and, even more, from the Roman 
people, it will certainly be right to revolt from the man to whom Constantine 
surrendered his authority. To speak too boldly, if the Romans were free to expel 
Constantine as they did Tarquin or to kill him as they did Julius Caesar, all the 
more will the Romans and the provinces be free to kill that man, whoever he 
may be, who has taken Constantine's place. True as this is, it goes beyond my 
subject, and therefore I want to restrain myself and not exploit anything that 
I have said except this: it is foolish to apply a verbal claim where there is 
armed force, because anything acquired by force is lost by force.!”” 
Valla’s text, always extremely dense, here has particular need of explica- 
tion, above all to highlight the shifts that shape the course of the Oration. 
The Caesars, in Valla’s view, were responsible for subduing the respublica 
to their command and then suppressing it altogether. Now, if the people 
subject to Rome had full right to claim their territorial and political auton- 
omy from the republic, all the more so, Valla continues, could they exer- 
cise that right to freedom by rising against the empire, based as it was on 
the Caesars’ innovations in political and civil structures. Indeed, the 
Caesars had appropriated for themselves the republic’s conquests (in 
themselves already illicit) after stripping the autonomy and freedom from 
the Senate and the People of Rome, the civil and institutional foundations 
of the republic. 
But these subject peoples, formerly in revolt against the empire, would 
now have even greater reason to rebel against the papacy, to which the 
last and most imperial of the Caesars (Constantine with his monarchism) 
decided to bequeath, as if his own inheritance, the right to rule over Rome 
and the Western Empire. And as it would have been fully licit for the 
Romans to banish Constantine from their City for betraying the respublica 
(as happened with Tarquinius Superbus) or rather to kill him (as hap- 
pened with Julius Caesar, the founder of the Augustan clan), thus now it 
would be licit and legitimate for the citizens of Rome and the Roman 
“provinces” to banish or kill Constantine’s direct successor, the Roman 
W7 Valla, De falso, 165.14-27 (88-89): “Et tamen melius in victis bello nationibus populo 
Romano quam Cesaribus rem publicam opprimentibus ius est. Quocirca si fas erat gentibus 
a Constantino et, quod multo plus est, a populo Romano desciscere, profecto et ab eo fas erit, 
cuicunque cesserit ille ius suum. Atque ut audacius agam, si Romanis licebat Constantinum 
aut exigere ut Tarquinum aut occidere ut Iulium Cesarem, multo magis eum vel Romanis vel 
provinciis licebit occidere, qui in locum Constantini utcunque successit. Hoc et si verum, tamen 
ultra causam meam est, et iccirco me reprimere volo nec aliud ex his colligere que dixi, nisi 
ineptum esse, ubi armorum vis est, ibi ius quenquam afferre verborum, guia quod armis 
acquiritur, idem rursus armis amittitur” (emphasis added) [translation modified]. 


[PDF page 147]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 127 
pope: “all the more will the Romans and the provinces be free to kill that man, 
whoever he may be, who has taken Constantine’s place.” 
It should also be noted that this trenchant observation is introduced by 
a qualifying “to speak too boldly” (ut audacius agam), with which Valla 
emphasizes (and he will insist on it again in the peroration), that he in no 
way intends to solicit violence from anyone against the pope. This is not 
only because the force of violence does not establish (nor is it capable of 
establishing) any right, but also, and above all, “because anything acquired 
by force is lost by force.” 
With this last declaration (“because anything acquired by force is lost 
by force”), Valla has reused almost verbatim (from section I of the Oration) 
the final words of the Senate’s speech dissuading Constantine from effect- 
ing the Donation. He does so to make definitively explicit that the hypoth- 
esis of the donation has by now become its thesis as a real event. It is a 
reality brought about by history, and it took place in the fourth-century 
shift — also an historical occurrence — marked by the political and religious 
convergence between Christianity, the pope, and the empire. 
Valla has thus called into question the very foundations, and more pre- 
cisely the Christian premises themselves, of Augustine’s historical assess- 
ment. Thus he has also radically de-theologized the Bishop of Hippo’s 
historical retrospective. Augustine had posited an “evangelical prepara- 
tion” (praeparatio evangelica) in Rome’s shift from republic to empire, 
thus rendering it the “providential” juncture for the rise of Christianity, 
constituted by the foundation of a Romano-Christian empire and the vic- 
tory over paganism announced by Constantine and his successors. Valla 
denies this is the case and in so doing arrives at the following conclusions. 
First, the gospel can give rise only to a church of believers founded on 
christiana libertas (saving grace) and thus a community of believers in 
Christ that is constituted as a respublica christiana. Second, Constantine’s 
conversion of the Roman empire into a Christian empire was in reality the 
definitive historical fall both of the civil and political /ibertas of the Roman 
republic and of the evangelical libertas of the new respublica christiana. 
Third, the Bishop of Rome, from the “succession from Christ” (the apos- 
tolic and evangelical “vicariate of Christ”) lapses into the “succession from 
Caesar,’ so that the pope is the new “High Priest” of imperial Rome and the 
Augustus of the Western Empire. 
These developments, in Valla’s description, created a new historical 
reality: the Roman papacy with its primacy and “imperial” hegemony, both 
juridico-political and spiritual, over the West. But the papacy’s inheritance, 
Valla goes on to reflect critically, was the inheritance of imperial Rome, 


[PDF page 148]
128 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
erected by the Caesars down to Constantine on the ashes of the Roman 
republic. Consequently, the very historical process that eventually assailed 
the empire (particularly in the West) would come around to the papacy 
in turn. 
With the “decline of the empire,” Rome’s imperial rule is shattered, as it 
were, by its subject peoples, who rise up to recover their freedom and 
autonomy. And in this way, the “decline of the empire” could be defined as 
the historical nemesis of the republican romana libertas that was 
oppressed by the Caesars and the emperors. But with the same “decline of 
the empire,” crisis will also come to the “imperial” primacy of the papacy, 
i.e. to the juridical and spiritual rule, or hegemony, bequeathed to it in the 
fourth century. What is more, the crisis of the papacy’s “imperial” rule — 
together with that of the Western Empire — will come, more severely, with 
the rise of peoples never conquered by or subjected to Rome: the Goths 
and the Germanic peoples, who end up participating in the configuration 
of the Roman West. 
The Goths were new peoples for the empire, fought by the Romans but 
never brought under their domination. Settling within the empire’s bor- 
ders, they became a part of it despite maintaining their autonomy and 
political and national identity. With the conquest of imperial Rome they 
rose in the course of the centuries to become the dominant peoples of the 
Western Empire. 
What is more, the Goths occupied Rome in 410 and were the first to 
master and conquer the empire. Rome, however, was saved by this 
destruction, because on the ashes of its pagan idols rose the City of the 
new Christianity, in which the Goths participated as believers in the new 
religion. This is Augustine’s original interpretation of the historical event 
that inspired not only the opening of the City of God but the whole of its 
historical and theological argumentation on the destinies of Rome and 
the Roman Empire. 
Against Augustine, Valla emphasizes that these Goths, who were 
opposed to and fought against Roman imperialism, could not have 
accepted the primacy of the Roman papacy, much less become its sub- 
jects. As a matter of fact, they would come to oppose the papacy’s pre- 
tenses to political and religious sovereignty over the Western Empire, 
precisely the sovereignty of which the pope had made himself heir on the 
basis of the first Christian emperor’s presumed “transfer of the empire.” 
With this argument, however, Valla also emphasizes other historical 
motives underlying the Constitutum. The pope uses Constantine’s 
conversion and donation of the empire to legitimate his own primacy and 


[PDF page 149]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 129 
to have his “imperial” hegemony accepted as well, and perhaps most of all, 
by the Germanic peoples. He will also have to adduce the same reasons to 
have his universal power recognized by all those cities and nations that, in 
the process of the empire’s crumbling, had arrived at their own civil and 
political freedom, their own autonomy and self-government, with the 
installation of urban seignories or national monarchies. The West had 
become a map of juridical and political autonomies, of communes, of cit- 
ies and nations after the fall of the Roman Empire. They had set them- 
selves up as sovereign states precisely for the purpose of defense from the 
barbarian invasions that followed the collapse of the empire and of cen- 
tral government at Rome. 
Now, if the Germanic peoples who had inherited the empire, along with 
the cities, nations, and states that had emerged from the wreck of imperial 
government, had affirmed with a fresh will and energy — and also often 
with arms — their personal autonomy and identity against the univer- 
sal empire and absolute rule of the Caesars, then these same cities, 
nations, and states were spurred to reaffirm, perhaps more steadfastly and 
willfully, their freedom and sovereignty against the papacy’s imperial- 
Christian rule, “the new tyranny of the pope.” Thus Valla writes: 
It is foolish to apply a verbal claim [i.e. the Constitutum and its derivatives | 
where there is armed force .... All the more since other new nations (as we 
have learned about the Goths), nations never subject to Roman rule, have 
occupied Italy and many provinces after driving out the original inhabitants: 
what is the justice in making them slaves, which they never were, particu- 
larly since they are victors and would perhaps be slaves of the people they 
conquered? At the same time, if any cities and nations which were deserted by 
the emperor, as we know happened, considered it necessary, as the barbarians 
were approaching, to choose a king under whose leadership they won a victory, 
should they depose this man from his position? Should they order his sons, 
esteemed as much for their father’s advocacy as for their own virtue, to be 
reduced to private status? So that they might be once again subject to a 
Roman emperor, particularly when they were in great need of the sons’ sup- 
port and hoped for help from no other source? 
If that emperor or Constantine were to come back to life or the Senate and 
the Roman People were to summon them to a general tribunal, such as the 
Amphictyons had in Greece, he would be immediately rebuffed on his first plea, 
because he was calling back into dependence and slavery those who had been 
formerly deserted by himas their protector, those who had been living for a long 
time under another ruler, those who had never been subject to a foreign king, 
those who were, in short, born to freedom and laid claim to their freedom by the 
strength of their minds and bodies. Hence it is clear that if the emperor and the 
Roman people are excluded from reclaiming their control, the Pope is excluded 
much more decisively, and if other nations that were under Rome are free either 


[PDF page 150]
130 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
to create their king or maintain a republic, the Roman people is much more 
free, especially in opposition to the new tyranny of the Pope.\”* 
This incisive passage constitutes the final part of section V, which should, 
as I have already hinted, be considered the effective conclusion of Valla’s 
entire discourse on the Donation. The closing of section V encapsulates 
the whole meaning of the Oration. It highlights (1) Valla’s “dissent” (his 
personal ethical stance) towards Constantinian ecclesiology, and (2) the 
fundamental premise (his objective understanding of that ecclesiology) 
underlying both his philologico-historical considerations and the course 
of his rhetorical argumentation. 
It must be added immediately, however, that Valla’s personal “dissent” 
comes to coincide, if not to be identified with, that fundamental premise of 
the Oration. Indeed, this dissent is the very freedom posed by Valla the ora- 
tor, the “Roman citizen” who stands up to contest the papal rule of Rome; 
and the fundamental premise underlying the whole critical discourse on the 
pseudo-Donation is itself also freedom: the romana libertas of the respublica, 
destroyed by the empire of the Caesars, and the christiana libertas of the 
Gospel (Evangelium), suppressed by the papacy’s Constantinian primacy. 
In the final analysis, Valla’s speech is revealed as a study of historical 
retrospection and reflection — with unquestionably critical aspects — on 
the fourth century and the major events that constituted its historical 
significance: the coming of Constantine and his “conversion,” and the 
resulting Constantinian foundation of the Christian empire in connection 
78 Tbid., 165.25-167.3 (89): “... ineptum esse, ubi armorum vis est, ibi ius quenquam 
afferre verborum .... Eo quidem magis, quod alie nove gentes — ut de Gothis accepimus — 
que nunquam sub imperio Romano fuerunt, fugatis veteribus incolis Italiam et multas pro- 
vincias occuparunt, quas in servitutem revocari, in qua nunquam fuerunt, que tandem 
equitas est, presertim victrices et fortasse a victis? Quo tempore si que urbes ac nationes, ut 
factum fuisse scimus, ab imperatore deserte ad barbarorum adventum necesse habuerunt 
deligere sibi regem, sub cuius auspiciis victoriam reportarunt: nunquid hunc postea a princi- 
patu deponerent? aut eius filios tum commendatione patris tum propria virtute favorabiles 
iuberent esse privatos? ut iterum sub Romano principe essent, maxime cum eorum opera 
assidue indigerent et nullum aliunde auxilium sperarent? 
Hos si Cesar ipse aut Constantinus ad vitam reversus aut etiam Senatus Populusque 
Romanus ad commune iudicium, quale in Grecia Amphictyonum fuit, vocaret, prima statim 
actione repelleretur, quod a se olim custode desertos, quod tam diu sub alio principe degentes, 
quod nunquam alienigene regi subditos, quod denique homines libertati natos et in liberta- 
tem robore animi corporisque assertos ad famulatum servitiumque reposceret, ut appareat, si 
Cesar, si populus Romanus a repetendo exclusus est, multo vehementius papam esse exclu- 
sum, et si licet aliis nationibus, que sub Roma fuerunt, aut regem sibi creare aut rem publicam 
tenere, multo magis id licere populo Romano, precipue adversus novam pape tyrannidem” 
(emphasis added) [translation modified]. I would like to thank Charles Till Davis (cited 
above in n. 103) for his attentive, pointed, and critical reading of my manuscript, which has 
given me greater insight into the comparison between Augustine and Valla. 


[PDF page 151]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 131 
with the religio catholica and the Roman papacy. Valla’s historical judgment 
of these events comes, therefore, to stand in opposition to the one expressed 
variously by the Christian writers and rhetoricians of that age and the next. 
Specifically, Valla has his eye on the range of authors from Eusebius of 
Caesarea and Rufinus (Ecclesiastical History), along with Lactantius (On the 
Deaths of the Persecutors), down to Augustine (City of God). 
Valla reaches his own historical and critical assessment of the fourth 
century by means of a rhetorical argumentative strategy supplemented 
by critical techniques. With his initial historico-philological reinterpreta- 
tion of the Constitutum — its immediate contextual and infratextual 
dimensions — Valla establishes the temporal dimension of the “document 
of donation” down to the remote past, to the outer margins of its origins. 
Panofsky assimilated Alberti’s geometric perspective (as the rediscovery 
of the third dimension of space) to Valla’s philological retrospective of his- 
tory (as the rediscovery of the third dimension of time), which the human- 
ist created through the morphological and semantic analysis of classical 
literature (humanae litterae).!”9 And in fact, in his Oration on the Donation 
of Constantine Valla does identify the Constitutum’s most proper histori- 
cal place, and he reveals its origins openly in the most adequate and true 
temporal dimension possible. By retracing the complex and multiform 
tradition of Constantinian ecclesiology in canon law and theology, Valla 
arrives at the impulse for that tradition: the fourth-century appropriation 
of Christianity by Constantine and his successors. 
The multiple aspects of the Oration’s overall meaning, which we have 
tried to explain here, as well as the importance of its historico-philological 
critique of the Constitutum, were fully understood by the canon lawyers 
and scholastic theologians of Valla’s time. Those of them who were 
strongly critical of Valla, in addition to humanist writers and other atten- 
tive readers of the text, reacted to specific sections of the Oration with 
arguments that were often as insightful as they were erudite. The text’s 
greatest historical impact, however, was felt in the following century, in 
the first decades of the Cinquecento with the coming of the Reformation. 
The Oration was first printed and popularized by Ulrich von Hutten in 
1518/19.18° Luther knew the text, profoundly absorbed it, and was busy 
reworking it for his written manifestos already in 1520/21. Its presence can 
179 Cf. Erwin Panofsky, Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art (London: Paladin, 
1970), 108. 
180 [ Actually, the first printed edition was issued in 1506. It was, however, ‘little noticed” 
and is “now very rare” (G.W. Bowersock, “Introduction,” in Valla, On the Donation of 


[PDF page 152]
132 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
be felt particularly in his To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation. 
Valla’s “falsification” of Constantine’s donation and pseudo-Constitutum 
would inspire politico-ecclesiological considerations in thinkers like von 
Hutten and Luther, who would more than once take up the theme of the 
Roman Church’s Konstantinheit (Constantinity). It thus indirectly sparked 
that age’s criticism of the papacy and assisted in the renewal of the German 
nation and its juridical and spiritual autonomy within Christendom. 
In fact, the juridical and spiritual autonomy that Luther and the 
entire Reformation had demanded from the papacy was founded on an 
original and profoundly evangelical ecclesiology of christiana libertas, set 
within an ecumenical and multi-confessional vision embracing all of 
Christendom. But Luther’s quite innovative conception of christiana liber- 
tas also owes a debt to the equally radical evangelical overtones of Valla’s 
Oration. To see this, we need only consider a few specific passages of the 
Oration, such as, for example, the radical antinomy Valla posits between 
imperium and evangelium in section I. Or, regarding christiana libertas, we 
could think of Valla’s treatments in section V: his historico-political analy- 
sis of the Pactum Hludovicianum (first part of the section) and his critique 
of Augustine’s City of God regarding the rise of the Goths within the con- 
fines of the Romano-Christian empire (second part of the section). These 
passages of the Oration, in which Valla presents as clearly as possible the 
crisis pertaining to the Roman papacy and Western Christendom, would 
have a strong effect first on Von Hutten and then on Luther. The 
Reformation’s protest was, in fact, the most radical evangelical and eccle- 
siological criticism of the papacy’s absolute primacy in jurisdiction and 
orthodoxy. It constituted the most complete rejection of the Church of 
Rome in its guise of Constantinian Caesaropapism. 
With noteworthy documentary contributions, Wolfram Setz has 
already traced this history of the reception, diffusion, and reinterpretation 
of Valla’s Oration in the first decades of the Reformation. Setz has also 
highlighted the humanist Cochlaeus’ criticism of Luther’s reading of 
Valla’s work, namely that Luther self-servingly used elements of the 
Oration that supported his own political and theological criticism of the 
papacy. Yet Setz’s observations on this count must be elaborated upon 
and expanded in the light of the reinterpretation of Valla’s text offered in 
the present essay.!91 
Constantine, vi—xv, at ix). For all intents and purposes, it was von Hutten’s edition that 
secured the Oration’s fame. Eds. | 
181 Setz, Lorenzo Vallas Schrift, 151-176. 


[PDF page 153]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 133 
Cochlaeus was undoubtedly right when he noted that Luther's interpre- 
tation of the Oration did not adhere to Valla’s specific arguments in criti- 
cism of the papacy or to the (explicit and/or implicit) intentions of Valla’s 
text. No different from Cochlaeus, in this respect, were certain preeminent 
theorists of controversialist (and still pre-Tridentine) anti-Reformation 
theology such as Augustino Steuco and Giovanmaria dei Tolosani. 
Although Valla’s humanism (together with that of Erasmus) was in their 
view linked in many ways to Luther's ecclesiological criticism, they never 
claimed an operative, fully continuous connection between Valla’s Oration 
and Luther’s writings against the papacy.!8* What is more, the judg- 
ment shared by Steuco and Tolosani reveals an awareness on the part of 
contemporaries — critical of both Luther and of humanism, and especially 
of Valla — that seems the most authoritative verification of what Coch- 
laeus had discerned. Indeed, as far as these critics were concerned, 
Valla’s Oration was not, nor could it be, the premise leading to Luther's 
conclusion that the pope was the incarnation of the “Antichrist,” as Luther 
would write (for example) in the Vorrede to the Apocalypse of his Biblia 
deudsch — for the Oration was founded completely on the presumption 
that the Bishop of Rome is the “vicar of Christ.”183 
Moreover, Cochlaeus’s point of view, like that of the controversialist 
theologians Steuco and Tolosani, constitutes further exemplary evidence 
of humanist culture’s “autonomy,” as Charles Trinkaus has written, with 
regard first to the Reformation and then to the Counter-Reformation. 
Renaissance humanism — both in Italy and north of the Alps in the early 
sixteenth century — was a literary, philosophical, and theological culture 
with its own distinct features. It came into its own, above all in the camps 
of theology and politics, rather as what Delio Cantimori has called the 
“heresy of the sixteenth century” and what Friedrich Heer identifies as the 
“third power” of ideas and practices in the “Confessional Age” (between 
the pluralist Reformation and the unitary Counter-Reformation).!®* 
182 Camporeale, “Giovanni Tolosani, O.P., e la teologia antiumanistica agli inizi della 
Riforma,” 809-831; Ronald Keith Delph, “Italian Humanism in the Early Reformation: 
Agostino Steuco (1497-1548)” (Ph.D. dissertation in History, University of Michigan), 1987, 
esp. ch. 3: “Humanist Scholarship in Defence of Papal Supremacy” (pp. 218-326). 
183 Camporeale, “Giovanmaria dei Tolosani O.P.: 1530-1546. Umanesimo, Riforma e teo- 
logia controversista,” 216-227 (= idem, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma, 
6-428). 
Hi 184 Tae Cantimori, Eretici italiani del Cinquecento (Firenze: Sansoni, 1939); Friedrich 
Heer, Die Dritte Kraft. Der europdische Humanismus zwischen den Fronten des Konfessionellen 
Zeitalters (Frankfurt: S. Fischer, 1959); Charles Trinkaus, The Scope of Renaissance 
Humanism (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1983). 


[PDF page 154]
134 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Valla’s philological and historical humanism must be seen within these 
historico-cultural parameters. The Oration on the pseudo-Donation thus 
becomes an emblematic case. Valla’s text, among the most important of 
Italian humanism generally, proposes the most radical criticism of the 
papal politics and ecclesiology of the first half of the fifteenth century. 
And yet it cannot be understood as the necessary premise to, even if it is 
quite suggestive of, the corresponding politics and ecclesiology of Martin 
Luther. On the contrary, Valla’s Oration, despite its warm reception among 
the reformers, would always remain an autonomous proposal and a dis- 
tinct position (albeit the losing alternative) with respect to the opposite 
poles of Reformation and Counter-Reformation, the ruling horizons of 
Christendom in the first half of the sixteenth century.!®° 
8. EPILOGUE: VALLA’S DEFENSE OF THE ORATION IN HIS LETTERS TO 
CARDINALS TREVISAN AND LANDRIANI 
This essay began with a letter sent by Ambrogio Traversari to Valla in 1433, 
in which the Camaldolese monk responded to his reading of De voluptate, 
which Valla had submitted to his judgment. There he expressed his admi- 
ration for the young humanist and assented both to his freedom in criti- 
cizing the philosophers of the past and to his willingness to take up an 
equally critical consideration of contemporary ethics. I would like now to 
conclude this study with the reinterpretation of two letters, both written 
by Valla himself in defense of the Oration on the Donation of Constantine. 
These pages from Valla’s correspondence are of particular importance. 
There we find his justification for refusing to recant even in the least 
degree what he had written regarding the “document of donation.” We 
read of the personal and cultural motivations that lie at the origin of his 
text. And finally, we learn the profound and pregnant meaning that Valla 
accorded to the work that he addressed with such frankness to the papacy 
and Christendom of his age. 
These two letters — briefly mentioned in the opening pages of this 
essay — have a particular context that determines their importance for 
Valla’s personal and intellectual autobiography as it was written across 
the whole of his correspondence. After years of exile from Rome, Valla 
185 See Paolo Prodi, Il sovrano pontefice. Un corpo e due anime: la monarchia papale nella 
prima eta moderna (Bolonga: Il Mulino, 1982) [English translation = The Papal Prince: One 
Body and Two Souls. The Papal Monarchy in Early Modern Europe, tr. Susan Haskins 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987) ]. 


[PDF page 155]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 135 
requested permission from Eugenius IV and his court once again to enter 
the city — the place of his birth, which gave him the privilege of calling 
himself a “Roman citizen.” His objective was to visit his mother, who at that 
point was in difficult circumstances (not precisely identifiable from the text 
of the letter, but probably related to her health). To this, Valla’s umpteenth 
request to enter Rome came a response naming the condition: he must 
retract his writing on the Donation of Constantine, which he had com- 
posed to aid King Alfonso of Aragon in his dispute with Pope Eugenius IV. 
In the letters to Trevisan and Landriani — both influential personages in 
the Roman curia — we are thus able to trace the issues and characteristics 
of Valla’s personal and emotional life, which intersect in his cultural devel- 
opment and give shape to his biography. The letters provide us with the 
clearest view of the most distinctive and original ideal of this humanist of 
the early fifteenth century: critical intellectual study and radical freedom 
of spirit. 
Valla’s letters are dated between the end of 1443 and the beginning 
of 1444. The first was written from Naples to Cardinal Trevisan on 
19 November (1443), the second, again from Naples, to Cardinal Landriani 
on 21 January (1444).18° The central theme of both letters is the demand, 
made by Eugenius IV and by several members of his curia, that Valla defin- 
itively retract the Oration in its entirety. Valla pointedly refuses, and the 
reasons he gives for doing so are quite illuminating for the composition 
and contents of the Oration. Indeed, what Valla says here in his private 
correspondence is as valuable for understanding that text as his Apologia, 
published in response to his imminent inquisitorial trial in Naples (April, 
1444), would be for his Repastinatio. In both his public apology and private 
pleas, Valla refuses to retract any part of any of his works. He justifies such 
action on the one hand with arguments exonerating himself from the 
charge of heresy. On the other, he provides further evidence confirming 
the validity of his writings, both on a strictly doctrinal level and on a 
broader cultural and political plane. 
In the sections of the letters that interest us, Valla highlights the funda- 
mental dimensions, at once objective and subjective, of his writing on the 
Constitutum. These can be summarized as human and Christian freedom. 
This freedom must be understood on the one hand as the specific domain 
of the intellectual in his critical and historical studies. On the other hand 
it is the freedom to publicly proclaim one’s insight and “dissent” regarding 
186 Valla, Epistole, 246-248, n. 22; 254-256, n. 25. 


[PDF page 156]
136 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
the ecclesiological tradition of the papacy and of Constantinian 
Christendom, whose seeds were sown and cultivated in a territory foreign 
to the Gospel. And it is precisely this insistence of Valla’s on human and 
Christian liberty that has prompted us to recapitulate this interpretive 
study of the Oration with a reading of the two letters. 
There are two passages that interest us in particular. The first is from 
the letter to Landriani, the second from that to Trevisan. Of the two, the 
latter elaborates more fully and explicitly on our theme and is thus the 
more important. Nevertheless, when compared with each other and with 
the Oration, both aid in discerning the motivations of the text and in 
understanding Valla’s character. 
In the letter to Cardinal Landriani we read: 
I think you know the issue: my work on the Donation of Constantine, which 
has brought on me the prejudice and accusations of many cardinals, not 
to mention the persecution of my enemies and detractors. For although 
I myself make confessions and stand as my own accuser, | seem to be at the 
mercy of Lucian, who according to Lactantius [Déy. Inst. I.9.8] spared neither 
men nor gods — the grounds for complaint are endless. And now a new bur- 
den has been added to my load. Jam censured for having attacked not only the 
dead but the living, and certain people are terrorizing me for it. If not for the 
sake of my mother, who is in Rome, I would consider this censure and terror 
of no account. In accordance with my customary manner, I would not write 
to you, nor would I make supplications to anyone. Directed by my conscience, 
happy with my discoveries, I would subsist on the noble freedom of saying what 
I think. But filial piety summons me to my mother, and I am forced backward 
like a ship whose sails are hit by a contrary wind. Both my longing to see her 
and good reason compel me to satisfy our common desire. Perhaps it will be 
possible to do in the city that which is difficult from afar: to make amends.!87 
In this text — the observation is rather obvious — the explicit reference to 
the “work on the Donation of Constantine” comes immediately to the fore. 
187 Tbid., 255f.22—39: “Causam meam, ut opinor, nosti: de opere, inquam, Constantiniane 
donationis, ob quod multis sancte apostolice sedis senatoribus invisum sum et reus agor, 
immo peragor ab inimicis meis atque invidis. Nam, cum ipse de me fatear ac me quoque 
accusem nec hominibus nec diis pepercisse videar — quod de Luciano Lactantius ait — non 
deest volentibus carpendi materia. Accessit huc novissimum onus, quo vivos, non modo 
defunctos exagitasse reprehendor et a quibusdam ob id terror mihi proponitur; quam ego 
reprehensionem terroremque, nisi matris causa, que istic est, pro meo more nihili facerem 
nec ad te propterea scriberem aut cuiquam supplicarem, contentus animi conscientia 
inventionibusque felix ac generosa quod sentiam dicendi libertate me pascens. Sed pietas 
matris me ad se revocat et quasi ventus quidam adversus alio vela flectere ac pene retror- 
sum cogit; eam nunc visendi et amor et ratio mihi necessitatem imponit ut amborum, et 
ipsius et meo, desiderio satisfaciam, fortasse emendaturus presens quod absenti emendare 
difficile est” (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 157]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 137 
We can also clearly see the contents of the Oration’s exordium and perora- 
tion. Let us remember that in the Oration Valla had given dramatic expres- 
sion to his dissent from the reigning cultural tradition in general and from 
Constantinian ecclesiology in particular. And he had affirmed his stance 
contesting the pseudo-Donation and the papacy, attacking the roots of 
their juridical and ecclesial premises. In his letter to Landriani he uses 
nearly exactly the same terms as in the Oration’s exordium. In their new 
context, however, these arguments serve most of all to defend the Oration’s 
validity, as well as its original motivations and fundamental themes. 
Valla protests his right of conscience (“directed by my conscience ...”): 
it is from this principle, operating on the planes of morality and of 
religion/Christianity, that Valla derives the right to communicate, pub- 
licly and for the benefit of the community of believers, the historical and 
ecclesial truth he has discovered (“... blessed with discoveries”). Above all, 
however, Valla is sure to guarantee Landriani that the Oration was born 
and bred of that “noble freedom of speech” with and in which the orator, 
and in the first place the Christian orator, fulfills his task — in “imitation of 
the Apostle Paul,’ as he had written the Oration’s prologue. 
In accordance with the original motivations for and results of his study, 
as well as the freedom of speech he claimed within the Christian church, 
Valla has absolutely no intention of justifying (so as to excuse) what he 
had written in the Oration. His insight had never been invalidated, nor 
would it ever be, by the jurisdictional and spiritual terror and power exer- 
cised by hierarchical authority in the Church and in Christendom. Indeed, 
once the papacy was declared to have usurped an illicit imperium over the 
civil and political society of the community of believers, what sense could 
it have to make retractions or to supplicate for absolution from heresy? 
And what sense could such retractions and supplications have in the light 
of that freedom of dissent by which Valla had charted his course? After all, 
he had come to identify the Oration’s very historical study and critical 
reflection with the freedom of conscience and of speech guaranteed 
within Christendom. Thus Valla insistently informs Landriani that his 
request (“supplication”) to reenter Rome after long exile is not spontane- 
ous but rather forced upon him by his love for his mother (“filial piety”). 
Valla seems to perceive at this moment in his life that his personal exis- 
tence hangs, as if stretched between opposing forces, at the intersection of 
the tensions that had stirred him most: the freedom of the orator and of 
the intellectual, and the love of family and of his own origins. He feels like 
a ship surprised by adverse winds and forced to strike the sails, a meta- 
phor that he had previously employed in the proem to the second book of 


[PDF page 158]
138 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
the Repastinatio.88 We see here the autobiographical strains in Valla’s 
letter to Landriani. 
Valla had in fact been, and he still was, the eccentric intellectual who 
managed to survive his forced wanderings only by breaking from the 
bonds of a private existence of sentiments (“filial piety/longing and rea- 
son”). These were often in conflict with the emotional situations in his life 
and with his intellectual activity, characterized as it was by philological 
study and radical challenges to tradition. They were in conflict with his 
civil and ecclesial calling as an orator, a figure who keeps his conscience 
clean by giving voice to it. 
What has been observed so far acquires deeper meaning in light of a 
long passage from the letter to Trevisan: 
Why did I write about the Donation of Constantine? This is what I have to jus- 
tify, as there are more than a few who disparage me for it and regard it as a 
crime. Ill-will was definitely not my motivation. Indeed, I would have wished 
most of all to have had to write under another pope, not under Eugenius. At 
this point nothing lends itself to the defense of my cause except the words of 
Gamaliel: “If this plan or this work is of men, it will come to nothing; but if it 
is of God, you cannot overthrow it” [Acts 5:38—39]. My work has been written 
and issued. I could not emend or suppress it if I had to, nor should I if I could. 
Either its truth will protect it, or its falseness will refute it. Others are now its 
judges and arbiters, not I. If I have spoken in error, they will bear witness to 
my error [cf. John 18:23]; but if I have spoken well, fair judges will not scourge 
me. Please, let us allow this work to stand on its own merits. Bear one thing in 
mind. I was not moved by hatred for the Pope, but acted for the sake of truth, of 
religion, and also of a certain renown — to show that I alone knew what no one 
else knew. 1 could have done still more damage, if I had been writing hostilely 
on these matters that are so arousing to the mind and spirit. For what I did 
redounds to the shame not only of the living but also of the dead and of those 
not yet born: certainly he who spares no one, offends no one. But the benefit 
I bestow upon posterity will be no less than the harm I have brought with one 
little book. Nevertheless, in the name of the good-will and respect I bore for 
the supreme pontiff in my youth, I beg you this (in itself an easy thing, and for 
your virtue the easiest of all): no benefice, no gift, no favor, no indulgence — just 
188 Valla, Repastinatio, 448.21-26 and 176.28-177.2: “rhetoric is arduous and by far the 
most difficult, nor should it be engaged in by all. For it enjoys sailing amidst the waves over 
the open sea, its sails billowing full, not giving way to the currents but ruling them: this is 
the nature of the highest and perfect eloquence. Dialectic, on the other hand, is the friend 
of safety, the ally of the coast; preferring to behold land rather than waters, it rows within 
sight of shores and cliffs” (“... longe difficillima rhetorica est et ardua, nec omnibus capes- 
senda. Nanque lato mari mediisque in undis vagari et tumidis ac sonantibus velis volitare 
gaudet, nec fluctibus cedit, sed imperat: de summa et perfecta loquor eloquentia. Dialectica 
vero amica securitatis, socia litorum, terras potius quam maria intuens, prope oras et 
scopulos remigat”) (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 159]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 139 
that you be yourself, that you behave as you always have. I want your true 
feelings about how I stand with you and the supreme pontiff, even if it means 
hearing that I am hateful to you and that I am not permitted [to return] to 
my fatherland .... Or does it seem to you too little that I suffer exile on account 
of such a petty annoyance? Or are you determined to punish me further?!89 
With this passage — together with what precedes it in the letter — Valla 
reaffirms first and in no uncertain terms what was already implicit in the 
Oration, namely that his criticism of the pseudo-Donation’s tradition and 
of the papacy’s “Constantinian” primacy throughout the ages was the 
product of an historico-philological analysis and no mere personal attack 
on Pope Eugenius IV. 
Valla is able to support these declarations by recalling the familiarity 
and friendship that he had enjoyed with Condulmer. Accordingly he 
reminds Trevisan of the esteem the future pope had expressed for his De 
comparatione Ciceronis Quintilianique, the first work he wrote as a young 
man on classical literature. And he calls to mind how, many years earlier, 
when he was barely a youth, he had attended the private lessons in Greek 
that Condulmer had received from Giovanni Aurispa: 
When still just a boy I felt great respect and love for Eugenius. This was 
before he became pope, when we studied Greek with the same teacher ..., 
when he accorded high praise to my treatise.!°° 
189 Valla, Epistole, 247{.40-73: “Cur de Constantini donatione composui? Hoc est quod pur- 
gare habeam, ut quod nonnulli optrectent mihi et quasi crimen intendant. Id ego tantum 
abest ut malivolentia fecerim, ut summopere optassem sub alio pontifice necesse mihi 
fuisse id facere, non sub Eugenio. Neque vero attinet hoc tempore libelli mei causam defen- 
dere, nisi Gamalielis verbis: ‘Si est ex hominibus consilium hoc aut opus, dissolvetur; sin 
autem ex deo, non poteritis dissolvere. Opus meum conditum editumque est, quod emendare 
aut supprimere nec possem si deberem, nec deberem si possem. Ipsa rei veritas se tuebitur aut 
ipsa falsitas se coarguet. Alii de illo iudices arbitrique iam sunt, non ego. Si male locutus 
sum, testimonium perhibebunt de malo; sin bene, non cedent me virgis equi iudices. Sed 
opus illud in sua, queso, causa quiescere sinamus. Hoc tantum consideres velim, non odio 
pape adductum, sed veritatis, sed religionis, sed cuiusdam etiam fame gratia motum, ut quod 
nemo sciret, id ego scisse solus viderer. Multum etiam nocere potuissem, si alieno animo 
fuissem in rebus que mentem animumque magis solicitant. Nam quod feci, hoc non modo 
ad pudorem presentium, sed mortuorum etiam ac futurorom pertinet: qui enim nemini parcit, 
nullum ledit. Verum cum non minus prodesse in posterum possim quam uno libello offendi, 
ego te per superiorum temporum meam in summum pontificem benivolentiam pie- 
tatemque obsecro id (quod, cum per se facile, tum vero tue virtuti facillimum): non benefi- 
cum, non munus, non gratiam, non veniam, sed ut similis tibi sis, ut quod semper fecisti 
facias, ne aliter ac sentis de animo erga me tuo summique pontificis rescribas, etiamsi me 
tibi odio esse nec licere mihi in patriam [redire] dicas .... An parum tibi videtur ob tantulam 
noxam me exilium pati? an ulterior tibi ultio querenda est?” (emphasis added). 
190 [bid., 246f.20-24: “Ego Eugenium ante papatum dilexi atque amavi adhuc adoles- 
centulus, cum eidem preceptori grecarum litterarum uterque operam daret ... cum 
opusculum meum magnopere laudasset” (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 160]
140 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
After these allusions to his personal history with Eugenius IV, Valla sets 
forth his arguments in defense of the Oration. They are of two kinds. The 
first line of defense is to stress his clear opposition to contemporary con- 
ciliarism and the conflict raging between Eugenius IV and the conciliarists 
of Basel. Here again he refers to what he had said, at least implicitly, in the 
Oration, even though his fundamental ecclesiological ideas were perhaps 
more radical than those of the conciliarists. Indeed, his ideas attacked the 
very foundations of the papacy and of traditional ecclesiology, and thus he 
did not emphasize them in the letter to Trevisan. As for conciliarism, it is 
noteworthy that Valla seems to have been impervious to the influence 
even of Tudeschi, one of the greatest canon lawyers of conciliarism. And 
this despite their close personal ties and the fact that Tudeschi repre- 
sented Alfonso of Aragon’s interests at Basel.!% It is his theoretical and 
political autonomy from the conciliarist struggle against Eugenius IV that 
allows Valla to boast to Cardinal Trevisan — obviously with the intention 
of addressing the pope himself — of never having written against the pope 
like the conciliarists, in spite of their explicit solicitation: 
I never went to Basel, although many people promised me great rewards; 
nor did I write against the pope, although with respect to writing and every 
kind of learning I was as capable, if I do say so myself, as anyone there past 
or present.!92 
These declarations shed light on Valla’s other line of defense, which is 
based on his own person as the author of the Oration. He clearly places the 
blame on the situation and the conditions within whose courtly and polit- 
ical context the Oration had been prompted, written, and diffused. If he 
had not been coerced by these circumstances, he never would have writ- 
ten against Eugenius IV: “I would have wished most of all to have had to 
write under another pope, not under Eugenius.” But what precisely does 
this last statement mean? In what way should the hypothetical desire and 
the necessity be understood? One place to search for and grasp the mean- 
ing of this necessity is in the immediate context of the letter to Trevisan. 
191 On Niccolo de’ Tudeschi (the “Abbot of Palermo” [“Abbas Panormitanus”] in Valla’s 
Antidota, in Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 271, 427), cf. Stieber, Pope 
Eugenius IV, 401-402, 512-513. On the ecclesiology/conciliarism question, see also Ulrich 
Horst, Zwischen Konziliarismus und Reformation. Studien zur Ekklesiologie in 
Dominikanerorden (Roma: Istituto Storico Domenicano, 1985), passim. 
192 Valla, Epistole, 247.35-39: “Ego neque illuc me contuli, cum multi non parva mihi 
policerentur; neque adversus papam scripsi, cum in scribendo atque in omni doctrina tan- 
tum possem quantum, ut apertissime dicam, quivis unus potuit illorum qui Basilee aut 
sunt aut fuerunt.’ 


[PDF page 161]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 141 
The other is against the background of what Valla had written in the 
Oration’s exordium, about the orator’s autonomy and freedom when men- 
aced with “proscription” by censors and men of power. 
There is no doubt that Valla was commissioned to defend the Crown of 
the Kingdom of Naples from the feudal power of the papacy. Nevertheless, 
the exact methods and contents, and above all what we can call the rhe- 
torical strategy of the work were fully of Valla’s own independent will and 
choosing. Therefore, his composition of the Oration ends up being config- 
ured against an ample background, in which the defense of Alfonso is 
situated according to relationships of continuity and discontinuity with 
the political and ideological struggle that had always existed between the 
Empire and the papacy. Indeed, in writing the Oration Valla was on the 
one hand aligning himself with the tradition of the imperial chanceries 
and jurists, employing their tried and true practice of claiming the 
Constitutum’s inauthenticity. On the other hand he was taking up a novel 
line, discontinuous with the past at least on an ideological level, and thus 
his philological exegesis of the Constitutum and his rhetorical strategy 
constitute something new and all his own. 
In this context of tradition and originality, Valla’s claim to necessity in 
writing the Oration (“to have had to write”) cannot simply be reduced to 
the necessity of courtly service and the fealty owed to a prince. Instead it 
must be expanded and understood as “conditions of necessity” that 
imposed themselves on his conscience and dignity as an intellectual. In 
this sense he could not remain silent. In the name of truth he had to pub- 
licize political and ecclesial ideas that put the “Constantinian” papacy in 
crisis and dictated the emancipation of the nations of Christendom from 
its feudal rule. The necessity, then, that gave rise to the Oration was the 
singular challenge of high political and theological value that Valla could 
not resist. Alfonso of Aragon’s commission coincided with the ecclesio- 
logical and historical notions that Valla had been developing for some 
time, both regarding the “Constantinian Church,” as lacking in evangelical 
authenticity, and concerning the “decline of the empire,’ as occasioned by 
the emancipation of the subject peoples from Rome’s rule. 
With his critique of the empire’s Caesarism and his exaltation of the 
Roman respublica as a form of radical evangelism in the face of the 
“Constantinian” pope, Valla gave an alternative (historical and ideologi- 
cal) meaning to the insurrection of peoples against the rule of the Roman 
empire as well as to their will to emancipation from the feudal and spiri- 
tual rule of the Roman papacy. At stake in the first case was the conquered 
barbarians’ recovery and reappropriation of their civil and political 


[PDF page 162]
142 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
freedom in the face of Roman imperialism. In the second it was the “citi- 
zens” of the respublica christiana’s recovery of their evangelical and eccle- 
sial freedom, which the Rome of the popes had expropriated with the false 
Donation of Constantine. 
These are the very themes addressed in the Oration, the work whose 
“incrimination” Valla laments (“there are more than a few people ... who 
regard it as a crime”) and whose retraction had been demanded from him. 
Hence the necessity of erecting a new defense both of “dissent” and of 
“rhetorical” freedom (of speech) in the face of the “Church.” Valla accom- 
plishes this task by drawing on Gamaliel’s response (in Acts 5:38f.) to the 
Sanhedrin’s resolute condemnation of the “new doctrine” of the Apostles, 
and by citing Christ’s words (in John 18:23) to the man who beat him 
before the High Priest for having announced his new “message.” And he 
offers a commentary. The truth or falsity of a doctrine or message, once it 
is written, is perpetuated or destroyed without the necessity of outside 
help, either from the original author or from censors. Every written work, 
by the fact of having been reduced to the letter, has a life of its own. An 
object of interpretation for both the present and the future, Valla’s work is 
already independent of its author and of its individual readers. It will 
stand or fall only in virtue of its truth or falsity. 
Valla concludes his defense of the Oration to Trevisan by reaffirming 
that his writing is a civil and ecclesial witness to the truth and to the faith: 
I was not moved by hatred of the Pope but acted for the sake of the truth, of 
religion, and also of a certain renown — to show that I alone knew what no 
one else knew. 
This declaration was quoted in the introduction to the present essay 
because it is relevant for identifying the Oration’s highly original ideals 
and for understanding them as a comprehensive whole, just as they had 
formed a synchronic whole in the experience of Valla’s everyday life. Now 
I would like to return to this declaration to conclude my interpretive study 
of Valla’s Oration. 
With this declaration Valla gathers and assembles into one phrase the 
words and concepts that provided the solid foundation for the Oration: 
truth, religion, and renown. “Truth” was the object of his philological and 
critical study. “Religion,” that is faith in the Gospel, was the standard to 
which he returned Christianity and its history. “Renown” was the essential 
aim of the role he played — as an intellectual, an orator, and a humanist — 
in the society and culture of his time, and more properly in the commu- 
nity of the church, which recognized the Gospel as the primary font of 
truth and of faith. 


[PDF page 163]
LORENZO VALLA AND THE DE FALSO CREDITA DONATIONE 143 
Valla, then, composes the Oration by developing the complex theme of 
“truth” and “faith” on various registers and in multiple keys. He aspires to 
the “glory” accorded to the intellectual who shows that he “knows” and 
who bestows his “knowledge” in its pure form upon the society in which 
he lives and works. The Oration thus fulfills the authentic dictate of the 
“orator,” as understood and defined by Quintilian as “the true wise man,”!%3 
and as personified by Valla in civil society and in the domain of the 
Church — both as a humanist “grammarian’” of classical and biblical litera- 
ture, and as an engaged intellectual and a philologist specialized in history 
and theology. The Oration is truly how Valla had described it in his letter to 
Aurispa: “I have written nothing more rhetorical.”!%4 
193 Camporeale, “Lorenzo Valla. Repastinatio,’ 238. an o 
194 Valla, Epistole, 252.91f.: “Orationem meam De donatione Constantini, qua nihil magis 
oratorium scripsi, sane longam ....” 


[PDF page 164]
< _ AVOKTANO ¢AmRAROTERANF REMCERAALLLAY CHER mt 
nol porsirciontettom hocinooap eleON. 
~ 
Se ot tt Oe RESON ME a Neistedtitnaiet cei 
a Senna? ethietrtheitedecabetite prosltod aikyre fei 
aan vbremarsd orgy: suc) ergy alt cl “~aboely rund” eid ewatesd odw 7. 
(nd ecattatesa erates Mii seat ie toa a arhttee trotted 
| une peters didihen clinch prydhyniieh nhadbuteanbasp onder “3 
eb iitacntied? madegi pe temlivin till btadedeittteatticpan the. a 
: vient WhAldied be tyoisinte bs not cenmndey saindeieind ulitsede choabeD - enh [jodie eA gptvdtshey Beiaelisersy aif ten sero hialbemomed 
cfesivepas atl viklt Depts dyer wlll sein icrtiplcvens gai AS cyclo Peviae o ans rhe celthmatut efclergubtinre tated circ preted, 
are (me cogme Okey words Hie fobur vary) ep che man whe beatin 
aiinng thoe Hyde Vrtaas fe navies ansaneices themew: ‘emagit and be : ies een: we. Che truth ov flitucod « coctrine on mesagge ane 
"seam at penpenaled at Wearpinend widhionit the amceealty af aeiside 
‘tales uber fran cn orighod mothinaiT Teameeensi Dery weytten work, 
Py live foes wary ving beam ond ecrd 56 the letter has a life of ie own Ab , 
atin Lreg pronation bir beats sent avid the Adie, Valles works 
pear ae owl he avthar f its individual reaclent: tev, 
rata owe ot (ho truth o fndsity. as 
‘alle ccmrchn des Be stelesne af the Orudiin to Teevisan bry iene | — eee pad ceulesial witness to Che truth a4 ane 
“Tse eral cenvred toy hacen od Shue Php bowl in ted f ; retipee, gad Geer 8 acoriata | a. seco a ’ 
ne Aid hime 
Ton dre ahh Sway in he iwc 
Sreopseseg is i andes ou ts bee ‘Oru 
é oho fu aactsey bad and tor wee “eantettin 
Hinmad 4 epobiees? whi int mperience of Valley eonnyeiaelife. Now t wend tht ene reat A tien woe omedude enuy, inverpretive stndy 
ils * a Bigeye decent, Vales poshone and assembles ints cue pihe a as ei carats Pas poveided the solid foymndalgear bb ae 
init, roti, 4 sod ewe, “Th Sth" was the object of Mis pb ial “i 4 
a arttiea eed “Betas Hew it mae Gospel, was the at lard ie’ 
im sinister naeanodt ramen ad te hisory, enown waa the ¢ 
an tie relly 86 ply peencpere » arate 
laos sachety sd lan ike and wor ab ey 
| ‘jy it Pi SAN | ith and of adhe i ee 


[PDF page 165]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE 
RENAISSANCE: THE ENCOMIUM OF ST. THOMAS - 1457 
Salvatore I. Camporeale 
(translated by Patrick Baker) 
1. AT THE ORIGINS OF NEO-THOMISM IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY 
The sum of research on Thomas Aquinas, especially in the wake of 
Kristeller’s work on Thomism and the Italian Renaissance, shows quite 
clearly that the Dominican’s life and teaching were continuously cele- 
brated in literature and iconography, and in various contexts (hagio- 
graphic, liturgical, and academic), from the mid-fourteenth century to the 
end of the fifteenth.} 
1.1. The Literary Encomium and the Iconographic “Triumph” of 
St. Thomas Aquinas in the Dominican Tradition 
The encomium of Aquinas has its origins in the “canonization literature” 
mentioned by Fra Giovanni di Napoli during the official celebrations in 
his city (July, 1323) for Thomas’s canonization by Pope John XXII. Fra 
Giovanni was the most renowned master of theology and promoter of 
Thomism in the Neapolitan Studio, and his sermons for the canonization 
initiated the liturgical tradition of panegyric surrounding Aquinas’s teach- 
ing. At the same time they took up the defense of that teaching, a defense 
which Giovanni had begun in Paris in 1316, when he was “dismissed” for 
his disputation on “whether it is permitted to teach the full doctrine and 
all the conclusions of brother Thomas in Paris” — an obvious polemic on 
the condemnation of 1277.” 
1 Paul Oskar Kristeller, Medieval Aspects of Renaissance Learning, ed. and tr. Edward P. 
Mahoney (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1974); John W. O’Malley, “Some 
Renaissance Panegyrics of Aquinas,” Renaissance Quarterly 27 (1974): 174-192. See also: 
Angelus Walz, Saint Thomas dAquin, ed. Paul Novarina (Louvain: Publications universi- 
taires, 1962); Cornelio Fabro, Breve introduzione al tomismo (Roma: Desclee, 1960); Daniel 
Ols, “Tommaso d’Aquino,” in Enciclopedia delle Religioni, vol. V, (Florence: Vallecchi, 1973), 
1809-25. For the immediate context of Valla’s Encomium, see O’Malley’s decisive and inno- 
vative study, “The Feast of Thomas Aquinas in Renaissance Rome: A Neglected Document 
and its Import,” Rivista di storia della chiesa in Italia 35 (1981): 1-27. 
2 Innocenzo Taurisano, Discepoli e biografi di S. Tommaso. Note storico-critiche (Roma: 
Societa Tipografica A. Manuzio, 1924), 45: “licteratura canonizationis”; an extract of Fra 


[PDF page 166]
146 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
The literary encomium has an equivalent in the iconographic “triumph.” 
This is especially the case in panegyric and apologetic painting, whose 
themes and subjects were almost always chosen with an eye to increasing 
the greater glory of the Dominican Order. Thus the symmetric correspon- 
dence between the encomium and the “triumph” turns out to be histori- 
cally indissoluble, fully illustrative and indicative of the strict parallelisms 
and convergences that exist between sermons and frescoes whose theme 
is the exaltation of Thomas. One thinks of the multiple historical and doc- 
trinal references repeated in literary texts and pictorial works; of the com- 
parisons and combinations, variously arranged, of Aquinas with the Greek 
and Latin patristic tradition; and of the complex and rich symbology of 
Thomist teaching as a synthesis and transcendence of Hellenic specula- 
tion, and as a definitive refutation of philosophical error (Averroes) and 
theological heresy (Arian). 
Beyond hagiographic and apologetic motives, the literary encomium 
and the pictorial triumph served an immediate and incisive purpose: they 
commemorated Aquinas’s works, which were read and commentated in 
the Dominican schools before a learned and devout audience (that could 
be either favorable or averse to the Order's doctrinal tradition). The Order 
of Preachers had nourished itself on Thomas’s corpus to the point of its 
becoming an integral part, and eventually the dominant part, of the 
Dominicans’ own cultural history. Aquinas’s “solar splendor’ had been 
assumed into the personal identity and glory of the Preachers, such that 
Thomas and the Dominican Order would ultimately converge in an indis- 
soluble nexus. Such was the case not only in more solemn and official 
moments like an ecumenical council — the Council of Florence and above 
all the Council of Trent come to mind — but also in seemingly marginal or 
peripheral places and occasions that would end up being defining and, to 
say the least, extremely significant for the construction and reaffirmation 
of its tradition. 
Giovanni's disputation, “utrum licite possit doceri Parisiis doctrina fratris Thomae quoad 
omnes conclusiones suas,” is given on p. 68. See also Fabro, Breve introduzione al tomismo, 
54-55. For the general context, see: Martin Grabmann, Mittelalterliches Geistesleben, 3 vols. 
(Miinchen: Hueber, 1926-1956), 3:370—410; idem, “La scuola tomista italiana nel sec. XIII e 
principio del XIV sec.,” Rivista di filosofia neoscolastica 15 (1923): 97-155; P. Glorieux, Les 
premieres polémiques thomistes. Vol. 1: Le Correctorium corruptorii “Quare” (Kain: Revue 
des sciences philosophiques et théologiques, 1927); idem, “La premiére pénétration 
thomiste et son probleme,” Revue dApologétique 53 (1931): 257-275, 385-510. See also 
Eugenio Marino, “La ‘questione tomista’ nelle fonti giuridico-encomiastiche dell’Ordine 
Domenicano, 1244-1974” [Camporeale indicated in 2002 that this essay by Marino was 
forthcoming in Memorie Domenicane, but it does not appear to have been published there, 
nor has it been possible to locate it elsewhere. Eds. }. 


[PDF page 167]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 147 
Let us consider, to take an example from the first decades of the four- 
teenth century, the sensational case of Fra Uberto Guidi di Nepozzano, 
the Dominican bachelor in the Studio Generale of Santa Maria Novella in 
Florence. On the solemn and official occasion of a “quodlibetal” disputa- 
tion in cathedra, Guidi impugned Aquinas's teaching, “arguing against his 
lector’s position” (determinando contra determinationem sui lectoris). The 
disputation was held in 1315, right at the time when efforts for Thomas’s 
canonization were underway. It seems that “his lector” on that occasion 
was Fra Remigio de’ Girolami (d. 1319), the authoritative promoter of the 
most orthodox form of Thomism in the Florentine school. Guidi himself 
appears to have been a person of some account in the Studio, thanks to 
both his theological training and his reputation in the Tuscan city. The 
death registry of Santa Maria Novella sings his praises, noting the course 
of his studies (begun in Paris, where he was sent by the same Fra Remigio 
de’ Girolami, then Provincial of the Roman Province) and his teaching in 
various monastic Studi (Viterbo, Arezzo, Siena, Perugia, and especially 
Florence). We also know that Bishop Francesco Silvestri commissioned 
him in 1330 to redact the Statutes of the Santa Maria Nuova hospital in 
Florence. The “case” of Guidi’s anti-Thomist thesis must catch our eye for 
its noteworthy repercussions. The Provincial Chapter of the Dominicans, 
held in Arezzo in that year, ordered the “contradictor” of the Florentine 
Studio to retract his thesis, barred him from teaching for two years, and 
transferred him to the monastery in Pistoia. The rehabilitation of this 
leading Dominican exponent of dissent to Thomism would come only 
years later. In the meantime the disputation of 1315 established a rigid con- 
tinuity and fidelity to the Thomist tradition in the Roman Province of the 
Order.? 
Such conflicts, of which the case of the Florentine scholar is only one 
example, are set on a larger stage where the debate over Thomism was 
played out in various guises and scenes; their most intense period was 
between the end of the thirteenth century and the first half of the four- 
teenth. But beyond the scholastic controversy, the canonization of 1323 
signals a decisive turn towards the consummation of the indissoluble 
union between the Dominican Order’s historico-ecclesial identity and 
the cultural tradition of Thomism. The solemn declaration of 1323 materi- 
alized in the Order’s defining appropriation of Thomas as its doctrinal 
3 In addition to the bibliography in the previous note, see also Grabmann, 
Mittelalterliches Geistesleben, 1:361-369, 2:530-547; Stefano Orlandi (ed.), Necrologio di 
S. Maria Novella, 2 vols. (Firenze: Olschki, 1955), 1:276-307, 502-503, 522-523. 


[PDF page 168]
148 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
luminary, as well as in the church community’s conscious acceptance of 
his “sainthood,” which broadened its liturgico-devotional horizon and 
deepened its own evangelical and theological awareness. This explains 
the fact that, in the first half of the fifteenth century, we can see its impact 
even in a learned audience situated on the periphery of, if not outright 
removed from, theological and academic disputations. Similarly, we find 
hints or explicit statements about the glory of Aquinas’s wisdom, the very 
wisdom that the Order of Preachers came to provide to the Church. 
It is certainly not without significance that the exaltation of Aquinas, 
the “glory” of the Dominican Order, becomes a basis for resolving major 
disputes between monastic communities and the secular clergy over 
issues of pastoral activity and civic harmony. This is what we find in a let- 
ter to Carlo dei Federici, the Florentine ambassador to the papal Curia (of 
Eugenius IV), which was issued from the Chancery of Carlo Marsuppini on 
10 June 1447: 
Since there is an open dispute between Santa Reparata and Santa Maria 
Novella over the solemnity of Corpus Christi, we want you to request of the 
pontiff that he issue a bull declaring the forenamed feast to be celebrated in 
Santa Maria Novella. Say that this has heretofore been customary and has 
been provided for by many of our laws; that this is also the place where the 
Signoria and all the Guilds go; and finally, that several pontiffs have lived in 
that most noble church, and that it has no other solemn feast. This should 
also be done out of respect for the many most noble citizens that frequent it, 
as well as in observance of Saint Thomas and many other friars, the out- 
standing theologians of [the Dominican] Order.* 
Such praise of Thomas will crop up often in the correspondence of human- 
ists. Even though they would seem to be at a greater distance from the 
philosophical and theological disputations of the contemporary Schools, 
they, too, are capable of appreciating Thomas’s precise literary place in 
the history of culture. And indeed, this is what we find when they speak of 
Thomas, such as in a letter Poggio Bracciolini sent to Niccolo Niccoli from 
London in 1420: 
4 Firenze, Archivio di Stato, Signori, Carteggi, Legazioni e Commissarie, Reg. 12, f. 16r-v: 
“Perché fra quelli di santa Reparata e di santa Maria Novella é certa discordia per la solen- 
nita del Corpo di Christo, voglamo che in nostro nome supplichiate al prefato pontefice 
degni provedere per sua bolla decta festa si celebri a santa Maria Novella, assegnando che 
sempre quivi fu usitato farla, et factone provedimento per pit nostre leggi. Et che sempre 
va 1a, la Signoria et tucte l’Arti. Et finalmente come nobilissima chiesa nella quale sono 
habitati pit pontefici. Et non ha altra festa solenne. Et etiandio per rispecto di molti nobil- 
issimi citadini populari di decta chiesa. Et ancora per contemplatione di Santo Thomaso et 
molti frati singularissimi theologi di quello Ordine.” 


[PDF page 169]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 149 
For I have already been able to devote three months to Aristotle, not so much 
for the sake of learning at present as of reading and seeing what is contained 
in each work. But this reading of mine is not altogether fruitless. I learn a lit- 
tle something every day, even if only superficially, and this is the reason 
why my love of Greek literature has come back so strong: I am becoming 
acquainted, in his own language, with an author who is practically speech- 
less and ridiculous in translation. For acommentator I have Thomas Aquinas, 
a great man and a good scholar, as the seriousness of the subject demands. 
The inventory of books in Bracciolini’s possession confirms what is said 
in this passage from the letter to Niccoli. The Florentine humanist’s per- 
sonal library contained two of Aquinas’s most important commentaries 
(expositiones) on Aristotle’s works: on the Metaphysics (In XII libros 
Metaphysicorum) and on the Physics (In VII libros Physicorum).° 
1.2. The History of Thomism and the Centrality of the Summa Theologiae 
in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries. Capreolo (d. 1444) and Gaetano 
(d. 1534): The Two Poles of Thomism’s Cultural Evolution in the Period 
Cornelio Fabro’s observation still holds true today: we lack a “complete, 
critical history of Thomism that reaps and sorts through the abundant 
harvest of available materials, organizing them critically and historically 
according to their polemical and doctrinal aspects.” Indeed, the need for a 
scholarly synthesis is even more pressing today in view of the growing 
number of contributions in recent years, particularly in the wake of the 
last centenary of Aquinas’s death (1274—-1974).® 
5 Poggio Bracciolini, Epistolae, ed. Tommaso Tonelli, 3 vols. (Firenze: L. Marchini, 1832— 
61), 1:8 (p. 39) (also avaialble in Bracciolini, Lettere, ed. Helene Harth, 3 vols. (Firenze: 
Olschki, 1984-1987), 1:15-16) [English translation = idem, Two Renaissance Book Hunters: 
The Letters of Poggius Bracciolini to Nicolaus de Niccolis, tr. Phyllis Walter Goodhart Gordon 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1974), 43]: “Ego jam tribus mensibus vaco Aristoteli, 
non tam discendi causa ad praesens, quam legendi ac videndi quid in quoque opere con- 
tineatur: nec est tamen omnino inutilis haec lectio, disco aliquid in diem, saltem superficie 
tenus, et haec est causa potissime, cur amor graecarum litterarum redierit, ut hunc virum 
quasi elinguem, et absurdum aliena lingua, cognoscam sua. Expositorem habeo Thomam 
de Aquino, virum egregium et facundum, prout patitur pondus rerum’ (tr. Gordon). Ernst 
Walser, Poggius Florentinus. Leben und Werke (Leipzig: Teubner, 1914), 422: doc. 141, n. 71 
and 72. Bracciolini often rebukes Valla for having dared to criticize Aquinas; see, e.g., his 
Invectiva in L. Vallam V, where he writes, “among our own, he criticizes Albert the Great 
and Thomas Aquinas for ignorance of philosophy” (“e nostris Albertum Magnum et 
Thomam Aquinatem ut ignaros philosophiae reprehendit’), in Poggio Bracciolini, Opera 
omnia, ed. Riccardo Fubini, 4 vols. (Torino: Bottega d’Erasmo, 1964-1969), 1:246. 
6 Fabro, Breve intoduzione al tomismo, 139. For a general view of the state of Thomist 
historiography, see the Atti del Congresso internazionale (Roma-Napoli, 17-24 aprile 1974): 
Tommaso d’Aquino nel suo settimo centenario, 9 vols. (Napoli: Edizioni domenicane ital- 
jane, 1975-1978). 


[PDF page 170]
150 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
This gaping lacuna leaves the historiographical problem of Thomism 
open to many possible solutions. It would also, however, seem to allow us 
in good conscience to continue making use of the periodization com- 
monly applied to Thomism. Although its phases do not exactly coincide 
and are a bit too imprecise, it furnishes a working hypothesis for histori- 
cally situating individual pieces of information and studies regarding gen- 
eral and specific questions. The Thomist tradition is generally divided into 
the following periods, marked by significant variables and defining 
moments in the historical evolution of Aquinas’s thought: primitive 
Thomism, until about 1350; the establishment of Thomist theology’s 
authority, from 1400 to 1550; the development of post-Tridentine Thomism, 
across the broad period from 1550 to 1800; and finally, contemporary 
neo-Thomism. 
Within this chronology of the history of Thomism and its various 
phases, let us focus our attention on the second period, from 1400 to 1550, 
in order to discern its particular character. We find there a determining 
factor that seems to characterize the fifteenth century in particular and 
that constitutes a significant shift in the tradition of Aquinas’s thought. On 
the basis of Grabmann’s research, Kristeller formulated and contextual- 
ized the phenomenon in the study to which we referred at the beginning 
of this essay: “What may be called the second period of the history of 
Thomism is marked by the tendency to adopt the Summa theologiae 
instead of the Sentences as the basic text in theology.”” 
The Summa’s rise over the course of the fifteenth century, first in 
Germany and then in Italy, to the status of an academic text — as a substi- 
tute, or at least as a competitor, to the work of Peter Lombard (the basic 
textbook in traditional theological instruction) — involved a precise reap- 
praisal of Aquinas’s doctrinal preeminence. This fact requires emphasis, 
as it becomes a unique and extremely illuminating point of reference for 
understanding the intended objective of Valla’s Encomium of St. Thomas, 
delivered in March of 1457 in the church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva in 
Rome. It is therefore necessary to establish the contours within which the 
cultural conflict incited by Valla took place. These were, on the one hand, 
the precise connotations and contextual dimensions of contemporary 
Thomism, which were represented by the very assembly and official 
7 Kristeller, Medieval Aspects, 40, who inn. 32 cites: Pierre Mandonnet, “Fréres Précheurs 
(la théologie dans l’ordre des),” in Dictionnaire de théologie catholique (Paris: Letouzey et 
Ané, 1923-1972), 6:863-924, at 906-907; Ricardo G. Villoslada, La Universidad de Paris 
durante los estudios de Francisco de Vitorio (Roma: Aedes Universitatis Gregorianae, 1938), 
279-307; and Grabmann, Mittelalterliches Geistesleben, 3:4n—448. 


[PDF page 171]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 151 
setting to which the Encomium was addressed, and, on the other hand, the 
perspectives and breadth of the “anti-Thomism” underlying the humanist 
problematic and polemic that emerged on the occasion of Valla’s solemn 
“disputation.” 
The preeminence acquired by the Summa theologiae in the course of 
the fifteenth century is a reliable indicator of the progressive expansion of 
Aquinas’s doctrinal influence and of the Thomist tradition’s growing 
autonomy in academic teaching. Eventually the Summa achieved cultural 
hegemony over the theological tradition of writing commentaries to the 
Sentences. In this process, Aquinas transcended his place within the his- 
tory of medieval thought and became an autonomous norm of theological 
and philosophical doctrine, a doctrine whose synthesis was inscribed in 
exemplary fashion in the textbook of the Summa. What is more, the 
Summa’s shift in theologico-cultural status seems to have occurred as a 
movement that straddled Dominican Schools and academic institutions 
independent of the Order, feeding on and motivated by the study of theol- 
ogy (and philosophy) itself. Indeed, it is telling — if we have not overlooked 
anything in our direct consultation of the sources — that the acts of the 
Capitula Generalia of the fifteenth century lack even one explicit declara- 
tion, imperative or exhortative, for the adoption of the Summa as a basic 
text for theological instruction. And this despite the fact that it was up to 
the general chapters, in practice at least, to assign and transfer the lectors 
in the Order’s major Studi throughout Europe. 
At this point we can trace the boundaries that mark the clear beginning 
and end of the Summa’s cultural shift in the fifteenth century, orienting 
ourselves chronologically and qualitatively by the major writings of 
Giovanni Capreolo (d. 1444) and Cardinal De Vio, commonly known as 
Gaetano (d. 1534).8 Capreolo’s Defensiones theologiae Thomae Aquinatis 
(Defenses of the Theology of Thomas Aquinas), which dates to around 1432, 
is generally seen as concluding the grand controversy between Thomism 
8 On Capreolo, see Umberto Degl’Innocenti, “Capreolo, Giovanni,” in Enciclopedia 
Cattolica, 12 vols. (Citta del Vaticano: Ente per l’Enciclopedia cattolica e per il Libro 
cattolico, 1948-1954), 3:719-22; Martin Grabmann, “Joannes Capreolus, der ‘Princeps 
Thomistarum’ und seine Stellung in der Geschichte der Thomistenschule,” Divus Thomas 
(Freiburg) 22 (1944): 85-109, 145-170; Kristeller, Medieval Aspects, 38-39; Fabro, Breve intro- 
duzione al tomismo, 61 and 104-105. On Gaetano, see Umberto Degl’Innocenti, “De Vio, 
Tommaso detto il Gaetano,” in Enciclopedia Cattolica, 4:1506-09; Il cardinale Tomaso de Vio 
Gaetano nel IV centenario della sua morte (Milano: Vita e pensiero, 1935; special issue of 
Rivista di filosofia neo-scolastica); Martin Grabmann, “Die Stellung des Kardinals Cajetan in 
der Geschichte des Thomismus,” Angelicum ui (1934): 547-560; Pierre Mandonnet, “II car- 
dinal Gaetano (1468-1534),” Memorie Domenicane 48 (1931): 38-102. 


[PDF page 172]
152 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
and anti-Thomism that raged in the fourteenth century. Nevertheless it 
should be mentioned that Capreolo, princeps Thomistarum (“prince of the 
Thomists”), also authored what is perhaps the last great commentary on 
Peter Lombard. This text is not only apologetic in nature but also delves 
deep into content. Furthermore, it is fully elaborated in strict adherence 
to Aquinas’s Scriptum in libros Sententarium (Commentary on the Books of 
the Sentences), and thus it privileged the “Thomism” of the commentary 
on the Sentences more than that of the Summa theologiae. 
The outer boundary of Thomism’s historical development in the fif- 
teenth century is marked by Gaetano’s magnum opus: his commentaries 
on Aquinas’s Summa theologiae, written between 1507 and 1522. This clas- 
sic work of Cardinal De Vio stands at the opposite pole from that of 
Capreolo and concludes the decisive shift that occurred in the second 
period of Thomism’s history. With the Council of Trent and the post-Tri- 
dentine period, it will be the Summa, as the normative text of Aquinas’s 
theological and philosophical doctrines, that determines the preeminence 
and precise value of the Thomist tradition, particularly in the sphere of 
dogmatic opposition to the Reformation. The so-called “Piana’” edition of 
Thomas’s corpus, promoted by Pius V, acts as a kind of bookend. We are 
now quite far indeed from the Dominican Chapter’s 1308 order to the 
members of the Roman Province regarding the teaching of theology in 
cathedral schools: “that lectors and bachelors teach from the Sentences 
and not from Thomas’s Summa.”9 
Bartolomeo Spina, the Dominican Master of the Sacred Palace and a 
tenacious defender of anti-Lutheran orthodoxy, showed a clear under- 
standing of this change in the retrospective appraisal of Thomism’s his- 
tory and Gaetano’s work that he issued a few years after De Vio’s death, in 
his preface to the posthumous edition of Gaetano’s commentary on the 
Secunda-secundae (first published in Lyon in 1540-41):!° 
° Thomas Kaeppeli and Antonio Dondaine (eds.), Acta Capitulorum Provincialium 
Provinciae Romanae (Roma: Institutum Historicum Fratrum Praedicatorum, 1941), 169: 
“quod lectores et baccellarii legant de Sententiis et non de Summa Thomae.” Cf. Angelus 
Walz, “Ordinationes Capitulorum Generalium de Sancto Thoma eiusque cultu et doc- 
trina,” Analecta Sacri Ordinis Praedicatorum 31 (1923): 168-173. 
10 Caietanus, Commentarii in I™II** Summae Theologiae S. Thomae Aquinatis, finished 
by Gaetano in February, 1517 and dedicated to Leo X. Reference is to the Lyon edition of 
1558 [= Cajetan, Prima Secundae Partis Summae Sacrae Theologiae Sancti Thomae], Ill, f. 
azy-a3y, where Spina’s praefatio is found. For the bibliography on Spina, who died towards 
the end of 1546 or at the beginning of 1547, see Innocenzo Taurisano, Hierarchia Ordinis 
Praedicatorum (Roma: Manuzio, 1916), 52; Angelus Walz, I domenicani al Concilio di Trento 
(Roma: Herder, 1961), passim. 


[PDF page 173]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 153 
Among all the doctors of the church who have been declared saints, [Thomas 
Aquinas] is called on as an authority even by those who oppose his teaching 
in certain areas (which opposition reveals their ignorance). When disputing 
or teaching the doctors were wont to say, “such is the opinion of the holy 
doctor,” or, “the holy doctor thought thus” .... Whoever does not admire or 
praise the wisdom of this man is destitute of wisdom, or he is without a 
doubt jealous and wicked. For with the rising of his sun, every mere shadow 
of error and heresy was immediately chased away from the aspect of holy 
mother church. Whatever doubt, whatever anxiety sprouts forth in the 
church from the devil's seed dissolves and vanishes at once when Thomas is 
appointed judge. Through Thomas all of ecclesiastical dogma is strength- 
ened, and its decrees receive confirmation. Who in our time, indeed who 
since the rising of this sun, has become a logician, philosopher, or theolo- 
gian of the highest caliber without seeking the support of divine Thomas’s 
most constant wisdom? What learned and eloquent speaker ascends the 
pulpit without borrowing from Thomas what instructs and moves the peo- 
ple? What venerable doctor in cathedra (if, that is, he should teach the truth) 
does Thomas not furnish with the certitude of his wisdom? Finally, who 
braves a scholastic competition without first girding himself with the arms 
of Thomas? ... Nor has any of the glory of this holiest doctor been lost to the 
disturbances of any detractors whatsoever in our lifetime. On the contrary, 
like gold tempered by fire, his wisdom prevails untarnished over the unwise, 
shining forth from a distance. And the fame amassed everywhere by the 
most holy doctor, being defended by the many with all vigor, has grown 
beyond all proportion. 
Spina sees the timelessness of Thomism — with the Summa’s rise to pre- 
eminence during the fifteenth century — as the long route of the Dominican 
theological tradition connecting the first Thomas, Aquinas, to the second, 
Gaetano: 
Thomas Gaetanus, coming much later, whose wisdom and exemplary life 
were just about second to none in these days, like a living image of Aquinas 
was inspired by the Lord to proceed with the work of this most incredible 
man. His merits compel, and his perpetual monument induces, posterity to 
imitate him .... The doctrine which the divine Thomas had diffused through- 
out the whole world was given a brighter sheen by this second Thomas’s 
interpretations .... Thus everyone can rightly recite these verses when burst- 
ing into the praise of both princes: ‘as the morning star in the midst of a 
cloud, and as the moon at the full, and as the shining sun’ [Ecclus. 50:6-7], 
thus they shine on the temple of God.” 
4 Bartolomeo Spina, preface to Cajetan, Prima Secundae Partis Summae, III, f. azv-a3y: 
“(Thomas Aquinas] inter omnes ecclesiae doctores, sancti denominatione, ab his etiam, 
qui doctrinae eius in aliquibus (ex hoc imperiti) adversantur, antonomasice vocitetur, 
dum inter disputandum legendumve doctores dicere consueverunt: Haec est sancti docto- 
ris sententia; vel, sic tenuit sanctus doctor .... Sapientiam quoque illius qui non admiratur 


[PDF page 174]
154 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
The diptych sketched by Spina aims to demonstrate the timelessness and 
the (wholly Dominican) continuity of the Thomist theological tradition 
on the verge of the Council of Trent. Yet it is richer in parallelisms and 
connections than these passages might lead us to suppose. 
1.3. Valla’s Encomium: Its Place in History and Cultural Significance 
Valla’s 1457 Encomium of St. Thomas Aquinas (Encomion sancti Thomae 
Aquinatis) must be read within the cultural and ideological context of the 
teaching of theology in the fifteenth century. And at the same time it must 
be situated in the camp of critical opposition to Thomism’s rise to hege- 
mony in the study of theology in the same period. Taking Capreolo’s work 
and Gaetano’s commentaries as the polar extremes (from Peter Lombard’s 
Sentences to Aquinas’s Summa) of Thomism’s development in the fif- 
teenth century, we see the beginning and the end of the theological arc in 
which Valla’s discourse was situated; it was an attempt to break this linear 
continuity. Indeed, the Encomium is nothing other than the resulting cri- 
tique of the extremes of Thomism’s theological development in the cen- 
tury of humanism. It stands forth as a lucid and incisive call to arms to 
block and interrupt the (to Valla’s mind decidedly regressive) course of 
Thomism’s doctrinal development in particular and of theological study 
in general. Every sentence of the work is informed by this call to arms and 
aut extollit, non nisi sapientia ieiunus est, vel certe invidens ac malignus. Sole nanque isto 
suborto, omnes errorum ac haeresum umbrae, a sanctae matris ecclesiae facie protinus 
effugatae sunt. Quicquid dubietatis, quicquid scrupuli satore diabolo pullulat in ecclesia, 
Thoma iudice constituto, confestim dissolvitur ac vanescit. Omne per Thomam ecclesiasti- 
cum dogma firmatur roborataeque sanctiones persistunt. Quis aevo nostro, imo quis post 
solis huius ortum optimus logicus, philosophus, theologus evasit, qui non divi Thomae 
firmissimae sapientiae auxilium imploraverit? Quisnam doctus ac facundus concionator 
ambonem ascendit, qui non a Thoma mutuet, quae populum erudiant ac inflamment? Quis 
cathedram venerandus doctor insedit, cui non Thomas (si tamen vera doceat) sapientiae 
certitudinem subministret? Quis denique scholasticum certamen adoritur, qui non se prius 
Thomae armis accinxerit? ... Neque tamen sanctissimi huius doctoris aliquid suae gloriae 
deperit in hoc etiam nostrae peregrinationis tempore, ob quorumlibet etiam adversantium 
infestationem. Quinimo veluti per ignem probatum aurum sapientia illius ab insipientibus 
ex hoc impugnata praevalens, eminus fulget eiusdemque doctoris sanctissimi omnifariam 
cumulata celebritas, dum a multis validissime defensatur, crevit in immensum. 
Thomas Caietanus, postremus quidem tempore, sapientia vero ac vitae splendore his 
diebus nulli forte secundus, a Domino quasi vivens Aquinatis imago suscitatus est Viri 
huius singularissimi praeconia prosequi, eius compellunt merita, inducit monumentum 
perpetuum, quo ad imitandum trahantur posteri .... Doctrinam per divam Thomam in 
mundo effusam, alter hic Thomas fulgidiorem reddit explanationibus suis ... ut merito 
quisque in utriusque principis laudem prorumpens decantare possit: ‘Quasi stella matu- 
tina in medio nebulae, et quasi luna plena in diebus suis lucent, et quasi sol refulgens sic’ 
hi refulgent in templo dei.” 


[PDF page 175]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 155 
by the determination to make a frontal assault on the timelessness of 
Thomism and the specific direction that it was taking, as is clear from the 
circumstances of time and place (and not only these) in which Valla 
declaimed his panegyric. This oration at Santa Maria sopra Minerva - 
which Valla clearly saw as the densest abridged form for encapsulating the 
essential aspects of his own thought — should be considered in the direct 
light of his most mature literary efforts, namely those from the last decade 
of his life, the years 1448-1457 of his second Roman period. These are the 
unpublished third edition of the Dialecticae disputationes (Dialectical 
Disputations), the 1455 inaugural lecture “in principio sui studii,” which 
should be read in tandem with the proem to the translation of Thucydides’ 
History, and the second redaction of the Adnotationes in Novum Testa- 
mentum (Annotations on the New Testament). These are, in short, the 
premises and limits, and above all the context and particular approach 
that inform our interpretive and comparative reading of the Encomium of 
St. Thomas Aquinas (in the context of Valla’s oeuvre).! 
2 The text of the Encomion sancti Thomae was first printed by J. Vahlen, in 
Vierteljahrsschrift fiir Kultur und Litteratur der Renaissance 1 (1886): 384-396 (facsimile 
reprint in Lorenzo Valla, Opera omnia, ed. Eugenio Garin, 2 vols. [Torino: Bottega d’Erasmo, 
1962], 2:339-352). To the two manuscripts (Paris, Bibl. Nat., Lat. 781 A and Rome, Bibl. 
Angelica, 1500) mentioned and transcribed respectively by Vahlen and by G. Bertocci 
(Roma, 1888) must be added Modena, Bibl. Estense alpha T 6, 15, which contains several 
variants; this ms. was listed by Kristeller in Jter Italicum, 1:396b. A Spanish translation of 
the Encomium with the Latin text, re-edited on the basis of the Parisian and Roman manu- 
scripts, is available in Lorenzo Valla, Oraciones y Prefacios, ed. Francesco Adorno (Santiago: 
Universidad de Chile, 1955), with introduction and notes, 290-321. It is on the basis of this 
edition that we shall conduct our analysis of Valla’s text. An Italian translation of the 
Encomium is also readily available in Lorenzo Valla, Scritti filosofici e religiosi, ed. Giorgio 
Radetti (Firenze: Sansoni, 1953), 455ff., with introduction and notes. [A critical edition of 
the Latin text is now available: Lorenzo Valla, Encomion sancti Thome Aquinatis, ed. 
Stefano Cartei (Firenze: Polistampa, 2008); Cartei’s edition is the basis for the text and 
translation of the Encomium in the present volume, pp. 297-315, which is the source for all 
citations of the Encomium throughout this essay (cited according to paragraph and, for the 
Latin text, line number.] For bibliography on the Encomium, in addition to the indications 
in Kristeller, Medieval Aspects, 63-65 and notes, and in O’Malley, Some Renaissance 
Panegyrics of Aquinas, n.1 and passim, we add Mario Fois, Il pensiero cristiano di Lorenzo 
Valla nel quadro storico-culturale del suo ambiente (Roma: Libreria editrice dell’Universita 
Gregoriana, 1969), 456-469. Emblematic of a skewed reading of the Encomium is the article 
by Michele Schiavone, “Intorno all’Encomion Thomae Aquinatis di Lorenzo Valla,” Rivista di 
filosofia neo-scolastica 47 (1955): 73-79, where Valla is seen in a perspective quite different 
from the more recent historiography, which considers him the “theologian of the 
Renaissance”; thus Ekkehard Miihlenberg, “Laurentius Valla als Renaissancetheologe,” 
Zeitschrift fiir Theologie und Kirche 66 (1969): 466-480. On the celebration in honor of 
St. Thomas in Santa Maria sopra Minerva in Rome, see the documentation referred to by 
Kristeller, Medieval Aspects, 61, n. 114. The liturgical feast of St. Thomas was solemnly cele- 
brated as a cappella cardinalizia until recent times (1967), just as it had been, with all prob- 
ability, since Valla’s day and earlier than the period indicated by Johannes Burckardus in 


[PDF page 176]
156 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
1.4. The Cappellone degli Spagnoli in Florence 
(Second Half of the Fourteenth Century) and the Cappella Carafa 
in Rome (End of the Fifteenth Century): Iconographic 
Themes at the Poles of the Thomist Tradition 
The object of what has been said so far is to differentiate the neo- 
Thomism of the fifteenth century into two contrasting interpretive nodes 
that simultaneously act as highly meaningful historical delimitations: 
Capreolo’s Defensiones and the Commentarii on the Summa Theologiae. 
Indeed, the works of Capreolo and Gaetano constitute the polar extremes 
of a development — the Thomistic revival of the fifteenth century — that 
underlies the organic partition of Thomas’s systematic theology. Let us 
now turn from the “panegyric” of the commentators to the iconographic 
“triumph,” and thus to the symmetrical correspondence between theo- 
logical literature and pictorial visualization which we mentioned at the 
beginning of this essay. In this way we shall find artistic confirmation 
of the contrast, in terms of cultural distance and thematic variation, 
between the two poles of the Thomist tradition in the century of Italian 
humanism. 
As is known, Thomist encomiastic iconology was bor around the 
middle of the fourteenth century with Traini’s “triumph” (Pisa, ca. 1340). 
Using narrative cycles and ecclesiological and dogmatic elements, the 
painting elaborates an increasingly detailed and pregnant historico- 
doctrinal canonization of Aquinas. The Dominicans, who in Pisa, Florence, 
Rome, and elsewhere summoned well-known artists to fresco the walls of 
their city churches, were the ones who superintended the harmonic and 
systematic orchestration of the “triumph.” They were the ones who sug- 
gested to the painter the symbolic figures, the historical and allegorical 
personages, the doctrinal references and connotations. The “triumph,” 
the Liber notarum and in the Diarium, as cited by Kristeller, ibid., p. 61 [= Johann 
Burchard, Liber notarum: ab anno 1483 usque ad annum 1506, ed. Enrico Celani, 14 fasc. 
in 4 vols. (Citta di Castello: S. Lapi, 1907-1942); idem, Diarium, sive, Rerum urbanarum 
commentarii (1483-1506), ed. L. Thuasne, 3 vols. (Paris: Emest Leroux, 1883-1885); precise 
references in Kristeller]. An historical profile of this celebration at Santa Maria sopra 
Minerva is found in A. Zucchi (d. 1956), “Il Collegio di S. Tommaso d’Aquino alla Minerva,” 
unpublished work held in the church’s archives (Arch. Conv.), ch. IX: “La festa di 
S. Tommaso e il Collegio della Minerva,” ff. 61-71. I owe my photocopies of this 
unpublished work to Father Benedetto Carderi, whom I thank cordially. Cf. also Marie- 
Hyacinthe Laurent, “Autour de la féte de saint Thomas; Revue Thomiste 40 (1935): 257-263; 
see also B. Carderi, “I Registri del ‘Collegio S. Tommaso d’Aquino’ in Roma, conservati 
nell’archivio del convento di S. Maria sopra Minerva,” Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 7 (1976): 
346-358. 


[PDF page 177]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 157 
in short, was the defense and the reaffirmation of the timelessness of 
Thomas's philosophical and theological “summa,” of his Christian specula- 
tion and dogmatic orthodoxy; it portrayed Thomism as a paradigmatic 
form in the ecclesiastical tradition, a genuine source for reanimating 
and corroborating a revival of theological thought in the dynamic equilib- 
rium where Christianity and culture meet. And the grand frescos, such 
as those (exemplary ones) by Andrea di Bonaiuto, in the chapterhouse 
of the Chiostro Verde in S. Maria Novella (second half of the fourteenth 
century), or by Filippino Lippi, in the Cappella Carafa of Santa Maria sopra 
Minerva in Rome (in the last decade of the fifteenth century), serve to 
encapsulate the various rebirths of Thomism and the pictorializations 
related to them. 
3 George Kaftal, Iconography of the Saints in Central and South Italian Schools of 
Painting (Florence: Sansoni, 1965), 1088-1096, n. 395, figs. 1268-1277; idem, Iconography of 
the Saints in Tuscan Painting (Florence: Sansoni, 1952), 977-988, n. 217, figs. 1099-113; 
Stefano Orlandi, “I libri corali dis. Maria Novella con miniature dei sec. XIII e XIV,” Memorie 
Domenicane 83 (1966): 55-57. On the Cappellone degli Spagnoli: Richard Fremantle, 
Florentine Gothic Painters. From Giotto to Masaccio (London: Secker & Warburg, 1975), 
203-204, esp. figs. 416 and 418 (with bibliography); Millard Meiss, Painting in Florence and 
Siena after the Black Death: The Arts, Religion and Society in the Mid-Fourteenth Century 
(London: Harper & Rowe, 1973), ch. 4: “The Spanish Chapel,” 94-104; Pierre Francastel, 
Studi di sociologia dellarte, tr. Andrea Zanzotto (Milan: Rizzoli, 1976), 16 (original French 
ed. = Etudes de sociologie dart [Paris: Denoél/Gonthier, 1970]); but above all, for our theme, 
Julius von Schlosser, “Giusto’s Fresken in Padua und die Vorlaéufer der Stanza della 
Segnatura,” Jahrbuch der Kunsthistorischen Sammlungen des Allerhéchsten Kaiserhauses 17 
(1896): 13-100 (the interpretive scheme of the series of the artes and scientiae and the cor- 
responding auctoritates is found on p. 47). Schlosser’s proposed identification of the alle- 
gorical figures of the scientiae and their corresponding personages (for the artes there are 
no interpretive uncertainties) is partially dubious but seems at this point the most con- 
vincing. Nevertheless, we believe that the iconographic series of the scientiae (and thus of 
the related historical personages) must be reinterpreted in light of a long text of the 
Council of Constance regarding the condemnation of Wycliffe’s 29th “proposition” (Giovan 
Domenico Mansi [ed.], Sacrorum conciliorum nova et amplissima collectio, 53 vols. [ Paris: 
H. Welter, 1901-1927], 28:131-137). In that text (of 1415, but actually a synthesis of the aca- 
demic tradition of the late fourteenth century) we find the programmatic statute of the 
medieval university for the “artistic” and “scientific” education of clerics. The “scientific” 
one is given in tripartite form: law (civil and canon law), philosophy (natural philosophy, 
ethics, and metaphysics), and theology (scriptural and dogmatic). But what must be par- 
ticularly emphasized here is its “reduction” of the artes and the scientiae to the direct and 
immediate service of the “science of faith” (scientia fidei). From this connection between 
the text of the Council of Constance and the wall of the Cappellone we would conclude the 
following: in Andrea di Bonaiuto’s “triumph,” Thomas is exalted for having effected the 
greatest and most perfect synthesis (almost the incarnation of the medieval unéversitas 
studiorum) of all the artes and scientiae, none excluded but with each one still retaining its 
own specific function in relation to theoretical and practical “sacra doctrina’ (cf. Eugenio 
Marino, “Umanesimo e teologia. A proposito della recente storiografia su Lorenzo Valla,” 
Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 3 (1972): 198-218, at 209-210). Also on the Cappellone del 
Chiostro Verde, see J.-J. Berthier, Le triomphe de Saint Thomas, patron et protecteur des 


[PDF page 178]
158 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
The two endpoints of the progressive exaltation of Thomism that takes 
place during the period of Italian humanism are perfectly contemporane- 
ous with and strictly related to the mural cycles in the Florentine chapter- 
house (or “Cappellone degli Spagnoli”) and the Minervan Cappella 
(commissioned by Cardinal Oliviero Carafa). The “triumph” of Thomas 
executed by Andrea di Bonaiuto — who on 30 December 1365 was commis- 
sioned by the prior of S. Maria Novella to paint the entire chapterhouse — is 
écoles catholiques peint par Taddeo Gaddi dans la Chapelle des Espagnoles a Florence. Etude 
@histoire et dart (Fribourg [Switzerland]: Saint Paul, 1897). In that work, however, it is not 
only necessary to correct the attribution of the pictorial cycle to Taddeo Gaddi, but also to 
note the unlikelihood (apart from civil and canon law, represented by the first two sym- 
bolic figures starting from the left) of the successive division of the scientiae into: “moral,” 
“dogmatic,” “scholastic,” “mystic,” and “apologetic,” as well as the identification of the his- 
torical personages alligned with the same division. Unfortunately, Berthier’s iconographic 
interpretation has found its way into popular works, e.g., Maria Baciocchi de Péon, I/ 
Chiostro Verde e la Cappella degli Spagnoli (Firenze: Lumacchi, 1900) and Stefano Orlandi 
and Isnardo Grossi, Santa Maria Novella e suoi chiostrimonumentali. Guida storico-artisica 
(Firenze: Edizioni S. Becocci, 1974), 43-77. 
Among the many works on the Cappella Carafa in the Minerva in Rome, see in particu- 
lar: Mary Pittaluga, “Filippino Lippi,” in Enciclopedia universale dellarte, vol. 8:623—-631, at 
627-631; Urbain Mengin, Les deux Lippi (Paris: Plon, 1932), 153-171; Alfred Scharf, Filippino 
Lippi (Vienna: A. Schroll, 1935), 39-45, pls. 45-55; Valerio Mariani, “L’arte di Filippino 
Lippi,” in Saggi su Filippino Lippi (Firenze: Arnaud, 1957), 71-84; J.-J. Berthier, Léglise de la 
Minerve a Rome (Roma: Cooperativa tipografica Manuzio, 1910), 148-196; Carlo Bertelli, 
“Appunti sugli affreschi nella Cappella Carafa alla Minerva,” Archivum Fratrum 
Praedicatorum 35 (1965): 115-130. For what will be said later about the Minervan Cappella, 
it is worth remembering that Gaetano dedicated his Commentarium on the prima pars of 
the Summa Theologiae, finished in May, 1507 (cf. n. 10 above) and published in Venice in 
1508, to cardinal Oliviero Carafa. Gaetano’s dedicatory “praefatio” ends with the following 
passage: “Now I come to myself, who have always been loved by you with fatherly affec- 
tion, increased with benefices, and decorated with high offices. I would rightly have to be 
censured for the vice of ingratitude if I should offer these fruits of my studies to another 
rather than to you, to whom I have also dedicated lesser works, especially since you most 
of all encouraged me to hammer out this intepretation, and, when it was nearly well fin- 
ished, you not only requested often but even violently demanded that it be published. 
Receive now this gift of ours favorably, and accept it as a pledge and a monument to my 
faith and regard for you. For all time, be well.” (Commentarii in III** Summae Theologiae 
S. Thomae Aquinatis, p. *2v: “Venio nunc ad meipsum, qui paterna charitate semper abs te 
dilectus, beneficiis auctus, dignitatibusque ornatus, ingrati animi vitio iure damnandus 
sim, si alii quam tibi hos quoque studiorum meorum fructus detulerim, cui minora etiam 
dedicavi. Praesertim cum tu me ad hanc cudendam expositionem adhortatus maxime 
fueris, vixque bene absolutam, publicari non solum saepe petieris, verum etiam flagi- 
taveris. Cape igitur munus hoc nostrum benigna fronte, meaeque fidei atque observantiae 
erga te pignus hoc monumentumque agnosce. In aevum, vale.”) Finally, let us add that the 
“triumph” of Thomas would later find a Counter-Reformation iconographic expression in 
its figurative assimilation of ancient Roman heroes. For this aspect, see the design of 
Giuseppe Passeri (1654-1714) in Anthony Blunt and Hereward Lester Cooke, The Roman 
Drawings of the XVII and XVIII Centuries in the Collection of Her Majesty the Queen at 
Windsor Castle (London: Phaidon, 1960), 73 and 75, pl. 62. I would like to thank Prof. 
Nicholas Turner for calling my attention to Passeri’s design. 
n 


[PDF page 179]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 159 
an integral part of the larger, differentiated (yet uninterrupted) theme of 
the event of salvation and its extension into the “time” of the Church 
Militant and Triumphant. The Church (ecclesia) is depicted in its secular 
historicity — its hegemonic scope notwithstanding — within the political 
realm of culture and the city. Portrayed along the lines of the Florentine 
communal polis and the Holy Roman Empire, it is simultaneously the 
space of the civic community and of universal Christendom. 
The Order of the “Hounds of the Lord” (Domini canes) serves a well- 
defined apologetic function against the heretical movements — the refer- 
ences to Peter Martyr and Aquinas’s Contra gentes are explicit — and 
discharges a specific ministry of the Word within the Church’s apostolic 
and pastoral mission. Aquinas, then, in an historic and privileged moment 
of the Order, in a sense recomposed and incarnated in himself the prac- 
tice and the speculation of the Christian community. Hence the pictorial 
and architectural passage, from the right wall around to the opposite side, 
which ascends from the narration of the journey (through various times 
and places) of the hierarchical and communitarian Church (ecclesia) to 
the “triumph” of Thomas. Inevitably, the central wall represents the event 
of salvation. 
In the “triumph,” Aquinas is exalted as the one who, “in the saintliness 
of his life,” possessed the theological and the cardinal virtues (winged per- 
sonifications in a circle above the doctoral chair) to an exemplary degree 
and who “magisterially illustrated them in his writings” (Orlandi);!* at the 
same time he is the one who achieved victory over dogmatic heresy (Arian 
and Nestorius) and philosophical error (Averroes). Situated between the 
apostle Paul and the New Testament Evangelists on the one hand, and the 
Law and the Prophets of the Old Testament on the other, he is the doctor 
Ecclesiae (Doctor of the Church) par excellence, the theologian organic to 
the Christian community, as is indicated by the sage liturgical verse (Wisd. 
of Sol. 7:7) inscribed on the open book held to his chest. But Aquinas’s 
theological doctrine is at the same time a global synthesis, a place of con- 
vergence (also in the pictorial display) for the sacred and profane sciences 
(from civil and canon law to the various disciplines constitutive of theol- 
ogy, the scientia fidei, or science of faith), as well as for the liberal arts of 
the quadrivium and the trivium. Aquinas’s is a vast and systematic work of 
theological investigation. It is situated in the (Greek and Latin) patristic 
tradition and at the summit of scholasticism (from Boethius to Peter 
14 [It has not been possible to identify the precise source of this quotation from Stefano 
Orlandi. Eds. ] 


[PDF page 180]
160 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Lombard). It makes use of civil and canon law and ecclesiology, takes up 
the ancient Greek and Latin authorities (auctoritates), and comes to be 
expressed, at the same time, in the divine rhythms of the Holy Spirit, 
which breathes its gifts into the theologian. Corresponding in number and 
pictorial space to the allegorical figures of the seven planets, which are 
placed above the arts of the quadrivium and trivium, the seven gifts of the 
Holy Spirit are represented by an equal number of allegorical figures, lined 
up with the symbolic series of the sciences and a procession of the histori- 
cal personages related to them. 
It seems obvious that the synchrony of Thomas’s “triumph” is inserted 
into an architectural and semantic arrangement with a specifically medi- 
eval perspective: it is an integral part of a space and time that is structur- 
ally Gothic and ideologically scholastic. The Cappellone’s vast mural cycle 
is laid out and tied together in concentric circles: the “triumph” of Thomas 
is set within the kerygmatic and apologetic function of the Dominican 
Figure 1. Andrea di Bonaiuto (fl. 1343-1377), Triumph of the Catholic Doctrine 
Embodied by St. Thomas Aquinas, fresco, 1365-1367. Cappellone degli Spagnoli, 
Santa Maria Novella, Florence (courtesy of Scala Archives). 


[PDF page 181]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 161 
Order; the Order’s apostolic mission is inscribed in the dimensions of the 
Church (ecclesia), which is hierarchically ordered and understood as a 
continuum from the time of its militancy to the “final days” of its glorifica- 
tion; finally, the event of salvation appears as omni-comprehensive of 
Christianity, endowing it with form from its apostolic origins to recent times 
and bringing it to completion. Thomas’s doctrine and works are therefore 
projected, within the pictorial cycle, as the recapitulation of Christian 
teaching and ancient culture, but also as a theological moment of 
Christianity immediately related to the ecclesial time of an historical epoch. 
At the close of the fifteenth century, the exaltation of Thomism is cele- 
brated in the Cappella Carafa in a perspective largely different from that 
of the Florentine Cappellone. The overall composition of the whole mural 
cycle, finished in September 1492 and dedicated to the “Divine Thomas,” 
canonizes Thomist theology as a doctrinal system of timeless contempo- 
rary applicability. Executed “according to theological and cultural princi- 
ples” and with the “illustrative character of the whole, envisioned as a 
giant illuminated page,” Lippi’s pictorial cycle takes on the aspect of an 
“ideal frontispiece” — not so much to Aquinas’s opera omnia, as Mariani 
believes, but rather, and above all, to his Summa theologiae.® It is enno- 
bled by a Renaissance architectural structure, taking on dimensions of 
Roman continuity and normativity. 
Lippi’s pictorial narrative is executed along the walls of the Minervan 
Cappella in a tripartite scheme, progressing naturally around a thematic 
nucleus from the right wall (the “triumph” of Thomas, or “disputation,” as 
Vasari calls it) to the opposite left wall (destroyed in 1566 to insert a monu- 
ment to Paul IV, designed by Ligorio). Here, according to Vasari, “Faith has 
taken Infidelity captive .... Hope has likewise overcome Despair and ... 
there are many other Virtues that have subjugated the Vice that is their 
opposite.”!© The cycle finishes on the central wall with the Assumption 
and the great Annunciation altarpiece. Lippi’s iconographic text is 
informed by a thematic continuity and organic connectivity, and it seems 
rather obvious (although this has been ignored by historians, even by the 
likes of Berthier) that the pictorial cycle follows the same tripartite scheme 
as the Summa theologiae. “In our endeavor to expound this science (sacra 
doctrina),” Aquinas writes in the prologue to quaestio 2, pars 1 of the 
Summa, “we shall treat: (1) of God; (2) of the rational creature’s advance 
18 (Mariani, “L’arte di Filippino Lippi,” 80.] 
16 [Giorgio Vasari, Lives of the Painters, Sculptors and Architects, tr. Gaston du C. de Vere 
(New York: Knopf, 1996), 567.] 


[PDF page 182]
162 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
towards God; (3) of Christ, who, as a man, is our way to God.”!” The 
Summa’s tripartite scheme is manifested in the Minervan Chapel’s walls 
as follows: the dogmatic and philosophical disputation (with the sequence 
of historical personages form the ranks of theological heresy and philo- 
sophical error) corresponds to pars 1 of the Summa (the unity and trinity 
of God, and the nature of man); the portrayal of Christian theological and 
moral practice corresponds to pars 2 (the theological and cardinal virtues, 
and their contrary vices); and the Annunciation, the initium Incarnationis 
(“beginning of the Incarnation”) corresponds to pars 3 (dedicated to the 
mystery of the God-man who is the way to salvation). 
The pictorial cycle, which takes us back to the right wall from which it 
began, is nothing other than the doctrinal illustration of the large Book, 
open in all its fullness, in the large rose window inscribed at the apex of 
the Renaissance arch. Above the “Disputation” scene, the arch majesti- 
cally outlines the throne where Thomas is seated; gathered at the feet of 
the throne — in a grouping that is significantly reduced in comparison with 
the “triumph’” of the Florentine Cappellone — are the allegorical figures of 
Grammar and Dialectic on one side, Philosophy and Theology on the 
other. The large book of the Summa theologiae (as identified by Berthier), 
decorated with lilies and illuminated by a sun above it, is held up by two 
putti: the work of the Angelic Doctor hovers in an almost divine and time- 
less glorification that transcends its very author.'® Finally, the fresco runs 
to the end of the high wall and continues through the entire curve of the 
lunette. Here is depicted, in an uninterrupted sequence (as Bertelli has 
noted), an event in Thomas’s life - mocked by Valla in a long passage of 
the Adnotationes — that is directly related to the doctrine of his theological 
work.!9 Thomas deposits his Book at the feet of the Cross, and Christ gives 
him the divine seal of dogmatic orthodoxy, saying: “you have written well 
of me, Thomas’ (bene scripsisti de me, Thoma). 
If the “triumph” of Thomas in the Cappellone degli Spagnoli celebrates 
Thomas as the greatest theologian of the universal church and as a thinker 
profoundly organic to medieval Christianity, the “triumph” in the Cappella 
Carafa is undoubtedly dedicated to the glorification of the Summa 
theologiae. Is it not perhaps within this perspective — which, incidentally, 
” Thomas Aquinas, Summa theologiae, prol. quae. 2, pars 1: “Ad huius sacrae doctrinae 
expositionem intendentes primo, tractabimus de Deo; secundo, de motu rationalis in Deum; 
tertio, de Christo, qui, secundum hominem, via est nobis tendendi in Deum.” Translation by 
the Fathers of the English Dominican Province (New York: Benziger Bros., 1948). 
18 [Berthier, L’Eglise de la Minerve, 167, 180.] 
"9 (Bertelli, “Appunti sugli affreschi nella cappella Carafa alla Minerva,” 117, n. 11.] 


[PDF page 183]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 163 
Figure 2. Filippino Lippi (ca. 1457-1504), Triumph of St. Thomas Aquinas over 
the Heretics, fresco, 1489-1492. Cappella Carafa, Santa Maria sopra Minerva, 
Rome (courtesy of Scala Archives). 
does much to explain the location of Pius Vs monument to Paul IV — that 
the Summa’s systematic theology will define the specific “Thomism” of the 
Council of Trent and the period of the Counter-Reformation, to say noth- 
ing of earlier anti-Lutheran controversialism? Aquinas’s Summa, and 
more precisely its recovery, seem to be at the root of this doctrinal and 
ecclesiological restoration — a restoration which was often reiterated, 
albeit with different elements, but which was initiated and raised to the 
status of an ideological paradigm in the fifteenth century. 
The polar extremes of the theological controversy of the fifteenth cen- 
tury thus came to converge in the former temple of Minerva: the humanist 
critique found in the Encomium of 1457, arguing for a science of faith alter- 
native to that of traditional scholasticism, and the counter-reaffirmation 
of the 1492 pictorial cycle, illustrating the timeless contemporary applica- 
bility of Thomist theology. Emerging in all their fullness and profundity, 
then, at the end of the fifteenth century, are on the one hand Valla’s insight 
into the ideological direction which would be taken by the theological 


[PDF page 184]
164 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
speculation of the Schools, and on the other hand the complex and sys- 
tematic anti-humanist response of neo-Thomism. Valla’s Encomium was a 
programmatic call for a humanist theology, and in the early sixteenth cen- 
tury it would yield Erasmus’s “theory or method of true theology” (ratio 
seu methodus verae theologiae). In the mid-fifteenth century, however, it 
functioned as a critique of scholasticism, which saw in Thomism the ori- 
gins of a timeless and normative theology. 
Timelessness is semantically a very rich category of iconography. Zeri 
based his Pittura e Controriforma on it, thereby reconstructing the “origins 
of ‘timeless art.” By transferring this concept to theology — and we are 
prompted to do so on account of analogical correlations — we could 
describe the critical objective of Valla’s 1457 speech as identifying, in the 
fifteenth-century scholastic-Thomist shift, the beginning of a zeitlose 
Theologie, a timeless theology, that would remain a constant in Christian 
culture.2° Indeed, precisely this seems to be the essential, contextual 
nucleus of the Encomium of St. Thomas. We now offer as close a reading of 
the text as possible in order to substantiate this position, which has been 
stated here as a mere hypothesis in a purely formal way. 
2. ENCOMIUM OF ST. THOMAS 
The Encomium’s composition is dense, full of literary and extra-literary 
interrelations, contextual combinations and contrasts, and different 
20 We owe the phrase zeitlose Theologie (timeless theology) to Federico Zeri, Pittura e 
Controriforma. Alle origini dell”arte senza tempo” (Torino: Einaudi, 1957). Our coinage zeit- 
lose Theologie is based on his zeitlose Kunst (timeless art) (p. 84), which he defines as “the 
escape of a work (of art) from the fleeting frailty of taste and of style.” His work also sug- 
gested the subtitle to our introduction: “at the origins of neo-Thomism in the fifteenth- 
century,” as it also effects a conceptual transfer from iconography (the iconography of 
“timeless art”) to the history of theology. But we owe not only this to Zeri; indeed our debt 
to him involves something much more important. Beyond the intentions of the author him- 
self, our reading of Pittura e Controriforma leads us to conclude the existence of a strict 
parallelism between the vicissitudes of “timeless art” and the multiform course of theologi- 
cal study between the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries — although the relative periods 
and corresponding chronological rhythms do not match up exactly. This proposition has 
undoubtedly been stated too briefly for the observation that we would like to make in this 
regard and that would require a fuller and more in-depth discussion. The reader, however, 
will easily be able to comprehend it by rereading Zeri’s monograph from the point of view of 
the history of theology and of the Church in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. What Zeri 
wrote on p. 113 finds clear confirmation here: “the artistic thermometer ... is the most precise 
indicator of society’s values and meanings.” This is what the Renaissance art historian Georg 
Weise demonstrated and repeated on many occasions (also with regard to other, more com- 
plex, aspects), in his Lideale eroico del Rinascimento e le sue premesse umanistiche (Napoli: 
Edizioni scientifiche italiane, 1961), ch. 1: “Il duplice concetto di Rinascimento,” 1-78. 


[PDF page 185]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 165 
levels and types of argument. Its complex structure — typically humanistic, 
as will be argued later — is not immediately clear. It will therefore be nec- 
essary to analyze it as a whole in order to understand its contents and to 
discover the solutions proposed by Valla in relation to the question of 
Thomism’s theological validity in the fifteenth century. The following 
observations, although derived or arrived at from different perspectives, 
are all made with a view to the theme of timelessness just mentioned, a 
theme which seems to us central to Valla’s oration.?! 
2.1. Exordium and Divine Invocation 
The very opening of the Encomium, with its references to and historico- 
literary considerations on the divine invocation (“invocatio coelestis 
numinis”), endows Valla’s discourse right from the beginning with the 
humanistic ambivalence between pagan cultural custom and Christian 
liturgical revival. Indeed, the extremely short exordium (directly preced- 
ing the recitation of the Ave Maria) focuses on the transfer — from the 
idolatrous worship of “false gods” to that of “the true God,” Christ — of this 
beseeching prayer for the encomiastic celebration of the saint. Valla obvi- 
ously has in mind the specific literary genre of the encomium, or laudati- 
vum genus (genre of praise), exemplified in Hellenic oratory (Isocrates, 
Demosthenes) and thoroughly described first by Aristotle and then by 
21 For the relationship between Valla and Quintilian, of which much will be said here in 
the first section of the present essay, see Salvatore I. Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo 
e teologia (Firenze: Istituto nazionale di studi sul Rinascimento, 1972), where “Valla’s 
Quintilianism” is amply treated and demonstrated with pertinent texts. See also Hanna- 
Barbara Gerl, Rhetorik als Philosophie. Lorenzo Valla (Miinchen: Fink, 1974). References to 
other sources in Valla’s writings are discussed in two very important essays (made avail- 
able by the generous courtesy of their author, although after our work was already com- 
pleted) by Riccardo Fubini, “Intendimenti umanistici e riferimenti patristici dal Petrarca al 
Valla,” Giornale Storico della Letteratura Italiana 151 (1974): 520-578; and idem, “Note su 
Lorenzo Vallaela composizione del De voluptate,” inIclassicinel Medioevo enell’Umanesimo. 
Miscellanea filologica (Genova: Universita di Genova, Istituto di Filologia Classica e 
Medioevale, 1975), 1-57. Valla’s autograph glosses to the Institutio oratoria are found in the 
ms. of Quintilian’s work in Paris, Bibl. Nat., Lat. 7723 (see Quintilian, Listituzione oratoria, 
ed. and tr. Rino Faranda, 2 vols. [Torino: UTET, 1968], 1:30-33). Valla’s glosses have also 
been collected in a ms. in Naples, Bibl. dei Gerolamini, M. XXVVII.2.15. For these two mss., 
see Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 19-120. In this earlier work I made 
an error which I would now like to correct: the ms. Paris, Bibl. Nat., lat. 6174 does not con- 
tain glosses on Quintilian by Valla but only the autograph version of the Gesta Ferdinandi 
regis Aragonum, now magisterially edited in a critical edition, with a full introduction, 
based on this very codex, by Ottavio Besomi (Padova: Antenore, 1973). [For a critical edi- 
tion of Valla’s glosses on Quintilian, see Lorenzo Valla, Le postille allTnstitutio oratoria di 
Quintiliano, eds. Lucia Cesarini Martinelli and Alessandro Perosa (Padova: Antenore, 
1996).] 


[PDF page 186]
166 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Quintilian (Institutio oratoria, III.4.12ff.). The exordium’s collocation and 
content, therefore — as Valla himself mentions — were dictated by norma- 
tive literary exigencies and by classical models. Hence the direct although 
not explicit reference to book IV, 4-6 of the Institutio oratoria (Orator’s 
Education) and to the prologue of Pliny’s Panegyric of Trajan. These refer- 
ences, incidentally, are suggested not only by textual parallelisms, but 
even more by Valla’s glosses on the passages just cited of the Institutio.” 
We have said that the opening of Valla’s celebrative oration is charac- 
terized by a humanist ambivalence towards the transfer, and even more 
towards the justification given for that transfer, of the “divine invocation” 
from pagan worship to Christian liturgy. We must now specify that it is 
precisely this transfer that provides the immediate occasion for resolving 
this ambivalence, unambiguously, in a Christian version of the genus lau- 
dativum, based on the model of ancient rhetoric. After the prologue, which 
introduces the recitation of the Ave Maria and thus in this specific case 
takes on a ritual force, Valla’s Encomium embarks upon a theological criti- 
cism of medieval and contemporary scholasticism, an historical rethink- 
ing of the Greek and Latin patristic tradition, and the search for a new 
principle of humanistic theology. 
2.2. The narratio and the Liturgical Celebration of the Saint: The Testimony 
of the Martyr/Confessor in the Army of Christ 
After the exordium, or prologue (cf. Institutio oratoria, IV.1), the narratio 
(cf. ibid., IV.2) begins with the words, “although all who die in the Lord ....” 
The theological nature of the oration’s opening is immediately felt. Indeed, 
the celebrative-liturgical narration of the deeds accomplished by the 
Christian hero, the saint, cannot be confined within the limits that cir- 
cumscribe the encomium - that genre of demonstrative rhetoric whose 
aim is the exaltation of excellence (areté) within the realm of the polis. 
This is the definition given by Aristotle (and used by Quintilian) in the 
22 Valla’s gloss on Institutio oratoria, IIl.4.13—14 is in ms. Paris, Bibl. Nat., lat. 7723, f. 327, 
right margin: “as of Isocrates and of many others; and after Quintilian: Pliny’s de laudibus 
Traiani, Latinus Pacatus’ de [sc. laudibus] Theodosii, Mamertinus’ de Juliani, Nazarius’ de 
Constantini (“ut Isocratis et aliorum nonnullorum; et post Quintilianum: Plinii de laudibus 
Traiani, Latini Pacati de Theodosii, Mamertini de Juliani, Nazarii De Constantini’). See the 
(rare) Panegyrici veteres, ed. Jacobus De La Baune (Venice: Javarina: 1728), “ad usum 
Serenissimi Delphini,” with notes by Christian Schwarz, where the “panegyrics” of the 
Latin authors named in Valla’s gloss are collected. For Pliny’s text, see Pliny the Younger, 
Letters and Panegyricus, trans. Betty Radice, 2 vols. (London: Heinemann, 1969), 2:322-324 
(Panegyricus, 11-6). 


[PDF page 187]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 167 
Rhetoric, book, chapter 9, 1367b-1368a. Among other things, we read there 
that, while 
praise is language that sets forth greatness of virtue ..., encomium deals with 
achievements .... Hence we pronounce an encomium upon those who have 
achieved something.?8 
It is even specified that the man’s praiseworthy actions must be rooted in 
the sphere of the family and in the paideia connected to it, in the social 
and civil dimensions where that action is carried out and made manifest 
in a conspicuous way. 
The Christian hero transcends the boundaries of the polis. His deeds 
extend into, or at least make themselves felt in, the space and time of the 
universal Church (ecclesia). This is why — and here we see the theological 
plane that the Encomium must reach — Valla’s narratio had to frame those 
deeds in the historical dimensions of the religious community. At the 
same time it had to exalt their doer as predestined by his “heroic virtues” 
for the eternal orders of the (Dionysian) “celestial hierarchy.” With his 
Encomium of St. Thomas, then, Valla was given the chance to treat themes 
- dear to him: the “Christian army,” a constant and privileged motif across 
his entire corpus from the Dialecticae disputationes to De libero arbitrio 
(On Free Will), and the glorification of paradise, described in the finale of 
book III of De vero falsoque bono (On the True and False Good).2* What is 
more, we should keep in mind that these two themes had been directly 
suggested to Valla by the Breviarium romanum, and precisely by the 
Communion of the martyrs and confessors recited for the feast of the 
saints.2 Thus we see that the further course of Valla’s oration is neither 
without foundation nor bereft of (liturgical) contextual nodes. 
And it is again the same liturgical context that presents Valla with the 
opportunity to dwell on the hagiographic distinction, observed in the 
23 [Aristotle, The ‘Art” of Rhetoric, tr. John Henry Freese (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1926), 101. ] 
24 In his Antidota to Poggio Bracciolini’s Invectivae, Valla describes the end of De vero 
falsoque bono as the place “where I defend the Christian cause, where I attack all pagans, 
where I depict the joys of paradise.” [Lorenzo Valla, Antidotum in Pogium IV, in idem, 
Opera omnia, 1:343: “ubi causam christianam ago, ubi gentiles cunctos impugno, ubi gaudia 
depingo paradisi.”] 
25 On the theme of the “Christian army’ and book III of De vero ... bono, see respectively 
Fois, Il pensiero cristiano di Lorenzo Valla, 476-481; and Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. 
Umanesimo e teologia, 340-341. On the “Communion of the martyrs and the confessors,.” cf. 
Herman A.P. Schmidt, Introductio in Liturgiam Occidentalem (Roma: Herder, 1960), 519- 
528; Aimé Georges Martimort, La Chiesa in preghiera. Introduzione alla liturgia (Roma: 
Descleé, 1966), 900-937. 


[PDF page 188]
168 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Latin Church, between “martyrs” and “confessors,” thus incorporating 
themes into his oration that only on their surface appear to be bits of phil- 
ological pedantry. 
Although all who die in the Lord are blessed and saints, nevertheless the 
Church expressly designates as blessed and saints those whom it recognizes 
either as having met death for religion, for truth, for justice, or as having 
achieved fame for leading a chaste and spotless life accompanied by divine 
signs and miracles. It uses the Greek word ‘martyrs’ (martyres) for the for- 
mer and the Latin one ‘confessors’ (confessores) for the latter, although both 
terms have approximately the same meaning. For what else have martyrs 
done in enduring torture and meeting death than confess themselves 
unwilling to deny Christ? .... On the other hand, what else have confessors 
done in living piously and writing piously than bear witness (testimonium) 
to the truth?2¢ 
The liturgico-hagiographic distinction is resolved, so to speak, in a series 
of linguistic annotations regarding the semantic unity or the “meaning” 
(vis nominis) of the two terms (testimonium), the analogic relationship of 
their meaning (testimony of “life” and/or of “death”), the diversity of their 
referents (the testimony of those “killed” for Christ or of those who “lived” 
for Christ), and the variation in lexeme (Greek “martyr,” Latin “confes- 
sor”). But beyond these annotations, which are typical of his philological 
writing, Valla brings up the disjunctive pair martyr/confessor in order to 
frame the regulations and various duties that give form and order to the 
“Christian army’: 
The Church, as I have said — at least the Latin one — has decided that only the 
former are to be called martyrs and honored with the privilege of that rank, 
because, as vigorous and brave soldiers, they are recognized by their com- 
mander for their military service and especially for their deeds in battle. The 
martyrs, then, who were soldiers of Christ, stood in the battle line for their 
commander and poured out their blood and life. The confessors were them- 
selves also soldiers of Christ, but they merely performed military labors 
(albeit great and lasting ones); and although they were prepared to undergo 
death for their commander, God, they did not actually undergo it or stand in 
the battle line.?” 
In the specific case of Aquinas, the liturgical and hagiographic distinction 
is overcome, as it were, by the dimension and importance of the “army of 
Christ” (militia Christi) that he commanded as Doctor of the Church. His 
“confession” (confessio), Valla continues, was certainly not without, or less 
26 Valla, Encomion, 2.30—40. 
27 Tbid., 3.45-53. 


[PDF page 189]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 169 
marked by, the “witness” (testimonium) to theological truth and ecclesial 
fidelity of sublime martyrs like Peter of Verona (1206-1252) and Thomas 
Becket (1118-1170). We should observe that the hagiographical connec- 
tions suggested here by Valla do not merely refer to Jacopo da Voragine’s 
ubiquitous Golden Legend, as Radetti has correctly pointed out.28 They 
must also be seen in the light of the iconographic depictions of the 
“triumph,” discussed above, in which (from Traini and Andrea di Bonaiuto 
to Beato Angelico) the thematic diptych of Thomas Aquinas/Peter of 
Verona often recurs. The one as Doctor of the Church, the other as Martyr 
for the faith, together they constitute the duo par excellence fulfilling the 
ecclesial calling of the Order of Preachers. 
From Aquinas’s historical task of commanding the “army of Christ,” 
the oration continues on to the saint’s place in the “celestial hierarchy.” 
Thomas’s dance with the angels in the gardens of paradise, painted by 
Fra Giovanni da Fiesole (Fra Angelico), has its literary echo in Valla’s text, 
which is aligned closely with the poetic tradition of Dante with regard to 
Aquinas’s celestial glory: 
Thomas Aquinas was ... like a kind of sun, shining forth in the dazzling splen- 
dor of his learning and burning bright with the ardor of his virtues. He is to be 
placed among the Cherubim for the splendor of his learning, among the 
Seraphim for the ardor of his virtues.29 
It might be objected, Valla continues, that in glorifying Thomas in this way 
he has ceded to the fanatical language of “hyperbole,” which ancient 
rhetoric vilified as a “friend of the foolish, enemy of the prudent.’%° He 
counters, 
Let me respond that I do indeed think that all who are imbued with the 
knowledge (scientia) of divine truths have something in common with the 
Cherubim, just as all who are infused with the love (caritas) of God are the 
fellows of the Seraphim — to say nothing of Thomas, so incredibly full of 
knowledge and love.*! 
In a quick gloss on Valla’s discourse, let us note that Dante’s theological 
poetics comes to be joined here with the mystic theology characteristic of 
Aquinas, although the indications of this are slight indeed (the symmetri- 
cal dyads of “imbued with knowledge/infused with love” and “shining 
forth in the dazzling splendor of his learning/burning with the bright 
28 [In Valla, Scritti filosofici e religiosi, 460-463 (notes). ] 
29 Valla, Encomion, 4.68-73 (emphasis added). 
30 Tbid., 5.75-76. 
31 [bid., 6.84-87 (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 190]
170 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
ardor of his virtues”). Furthermore, it is precisely this second dyad that 
provides the structure for Valla’s panegyric, dividing it between the two 
interrelated thematic units of virtue (virtus) and knowledge (scientia).°? 
2.3. Probatio and refutatio, the Central Section of the Encomium: 
Virtue, the First Thematic Unit, Elaborated Along the Hagiographic 
Topoi of Birth, Life, and Death and through a comparatio between 
Thomas and Dominic 
The narratio is followed by the probatio and refutatio (cf. Institutio orato- 
ria, V.1). This is the demonstrative section of the Encomium, and it is actu- 
ally the central and fullest part of Valla’s speech.*? It is linked to the 
previous narrative section by an introductory transitional passage indicat- 
ing its main argumentative themes: 
Justly, therefore, such a man - let me speak first about his virtues and later 
about his knowledge — justly was he destined to be foretold to the world 
before he was born, his birth prophesied, his life predicted, even his death 
announced.*4 
The thematic unit of virtue is developed within a rhetorical grid system. 
The horizontal axis is syntagmatic and relational and is composed of the 
hagiographic, charismatic, and prophetic topoi of birth (ortus), life (vita), 
and death (mors). The vertical axis, on the other hand, is systematic and 
correlational and is articulated by means of typological biblical figures 
representative of the kind of life to which God manifestly calls his elect. 
The theology of the messianic calling replicates for the humanist Valla, 
82 On the iconographic theme under discussion, cf. Stefano Orlandi, Beato Angelico 
(Firenze: Olschki, 1964), pl. VII and p. 24, pl. XLIII and p. 97, pl. LIII and pp. 104-105; 
L. Ferreti, “Un ‘trionfo’ di S. Tommaso nella chiesa dei Domenicani in Tivoli,” in San 
Tommaso dAquino O.P. Miscellanea storico-artistica, ed. Innocenzo Taurisano (Roma: 
A. Manuzio, 1924), 299-301. On hyperbole: Aristotle, Rhetoric, 3,u, 1413b; Quintilian, 
Institutio oratoria, VIII.6.73-76; cf. A.D. Leeman, Orationis ratio. Teoria e pratica stilistica 
degli oratori, storici e filosoft latini, ed. Elio Pasoli, tr. Gian Carlo Giardina and Rita Cuccioli 
Melloni (Bologna: Societa editrice il Mulino, 1974), 413-414 [English ed. = Orationis ratio: 
The Stylistic Theories and Practices of the Roman Orators, Historians, and Philosophers 
(Amsterdam: A. M. Hakkert, 1963); unless otherwise noted, all references to precise page 
numbers are to the Italian edition]. For the encomiastic attributes regarding Thomas’s 
virtus and scientia, Valla certainly has in mind the liturgical texts of the “divine office” 
recited for the saint’s feast: Breviarium iuxta ritum Ordinis Praedicatorum, ed. Michael 
Browne, 2 vols. (Roma: Sabina, 1962), in die, 1:947ff. 
°° For the argumentative structure of the probatio-refutatio, keep in mind chs. 8-n of 
book V of Institutio oratoria, which Valla follows to the letter in the final section of book 20 
of his Dialecticae disputationes. 
34 Valla, Encomion, 7.94—96. 


[PDF page 191]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 7a 
albeit in a qualitatively different way, the telos of the theios anér (divine 
man). But in this he was merely following medieval scholasticism, in 
which the Christian saint had been repeatedly and at times systematically 
theorized on the typology of the Hellenic hero. 
Thomas's birth is foretold — to his mother — according to the typology of 
the messianic prophet, reference to which is expressly made: 
God, whenever he has resolved to give something extraordinary and new to 
the world, is wont to announce it with signs or prophecies. There are very 
many examples of this ....35 
The typological model is here reflected in Dominic de Guzman (St. 
Dominic), “the founder of this family [of brothers],”3° to whom Thomas is 
then compared. The text claims to pass over “many examples’ for the sake 
of brevity; it is “content with one from the family.”37 And yet the asym- 
metrical pair of father and son (pater/filius) need not entail a subordina- 
tion in value either concerning the foretelling of the birth of one or the 
other, or regarding their respective lives. And so much is expressly 
confirmed: 
Let the prophecies about each man be equal, equal the merits of both their 
lives. Let neither be placed before the other .... We must honor them with 
equal veneration, both of them renowned for all the virtues, both for mira- 
cles without number.%8 
Then Valla introduces another, typically literary or humanist, pairing 
that sees the two saints “like two consuls, the highest of magistracies.”?9 
Nonetheless, it is the asymmetric pair of father and son that underlies the 
parallelism of the lives and works of the two men, of Dominic and Thomas. 
The biographical sketch is thus executed, rapidly and concisely, by way of 
the convergences of parallel lives but always in a series of asymmetrical 
relations. Here they are set off against one another in the order of the text, 
so as to make Valla’s comparatio immediately clear: 
Dominic founded the house of the Preachers 
Thomas covered its floors with marble. 
Dominic built its walls 
Thomas decorated them with the finest paintings. 
35 |bid., 7.99101. 
36 Tbid., 8.103. 
37 |bid., 7.101—-102. 
38 Jbid., 8.106—-109. 
39 [bid., 8.107-108. 


[PDF page 192]
172 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Dominic was the pillar of the brothers 
Thomas their shining example. 
Dominic planted 
Thomas gave water. 
The one shunned ... honors and episcopacies 
the other fled nobility, wealth, kinsmen, and parents. 
The one imitated the chastity and continence of Paul 
the other the virginity of John the Evangelist. 
Of the one nothing was more admirable than his humility 
the other had so much humility that he was even astonished at the 
boasting and bragging of others.4° 
From the “praises of their virtues,” the comparison continues to the cor- 
responding “testimonies of their virtues” — including the prediction of 
their deaths: 
Both men 
saw and heard 
the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, 
the most holy mother of God, 
the Lord our Savior. 
Both men were told about their imminent deaths. 
The one wrote the brothers’ most excellent Rule 
the other the most outstanding and the greatest number of books. 
Thomas devotes himself to writings 
Dominic rules the provinces ..., 
Certainly Thomas sends no more men to heaven with his writings 
than Dominic does with his Rule. 
Hence the closing, which follows the sequence of binary oppositions: 
Therefore let it be granted that virtue, glory, and miracles are equal in 
Dominic and Thomas, 
who are no more different and distinct from one another than 
the morning from the evening star.*! 
Thus, by making use of the stylistic device of the comparatio, or 
comparison — to which he himself makes explicit reference — Valla 
succeeds in compressing the traditional and most relevant hagiographic 
facts (derived from biographical sources on Aquinas, especially Guglielmo 
da Tocco) into the briefest of outlines. He has rejected other stylistic 
techniques, like the embellishment of ornatus and the exaggeration of 
amplificatio, which in this specific case would have dressed up an oration 
40 Tbid., 9.14-123. 
4 Tbid., 10-11.128-138. 


[PDF page 193]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 173 
that was supposed to be “simple and almost unadorned” (in accord with 
the “simple and plain brevity’ called for by Cicero).42 So much is confirmed 
by Valla himself before he moves on to the discussion of Thomas’s knowl- 
edge (scientia), the Encomium’s other thematic unit: 
I have spoken of Thomas's virtues and miracles briefly and simply, having 
made no use of exaggeration (amplificatio) and embellishment (exornatio) 
.... I believe you would now like me to say something about this saint’s 
knowledge, which I proposed to treat second, saying whom I would set him 
above and whom I would call his equal.*3 
2.4. Knowledge, the Second Thematic Unit: Aquinas as the 
Historical Model of Speculative Theology, and the refutatio 
of Thomism's Timelessness as a “Theological System” 
The passage cited just above ushers in the second part of the probatio, or 
demonstrative section, of Valla’s panegyric. Let us first emphasize the fol- 
lowing. It is here in the discourse on Aquinas’s knowledge (scientia) — the 
opposite pole from virtue (virtus) on the structural axis around which the 
whole text revolves — that the probatio turns into its opposite: a refutatio, 
or refutation. That is, the encomiastic probatio of Thomas, as the historical 
model of virtue and knowledge, becomes the refutatio of Thomism’s time- 
lessness and perennity as a theological system. 
42 On comparatio, see Quintilian, Jnstitutio oratoria, 1.4.21; on ornatus and amplificatio, 
see ibid., VIII.3 and 4; “simple and almost unadorned”: ibid, VIII.6.41 (“nuda ... et velut 
incompta’); “simple and plain brevity”: Cicero, De oratore, 2.84.341 (“brevitatem ... nudam 
atque inornatam’). 
43 Valla, Encomion, 12.142-146. (emphasis added). The use of comparatio in the praise of 
illustrious men can take the form of describing “the respective merits of two characters. 
This is of course a very similar theme to the preceding, but involves a duplication of the 
subject matter and deals not merely with the nature of virtues and vices, but with their 
degree as well,” Institutio oratoria, II.4.20-21, tr. E.H. Butler, 4 vols. (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1920-1922). Moreover, contraries (contraria), examples (exem- 
pla), and comparisons (similitudines) (Institutio oratoria, V.o and 1; VIII.3.72ff.) are the 
three types of arguments (rationes: “a ratio ... is that by which whatever has clearly hap- 
pened is defended,” ibid., III.11.4) made use of in argumentative rhetoric. [On this point, see 
also p. 249 below. Eds.] The phrase with which the Encomium begins its comparison of 
Thomas and Dominic — “because the rule of the Preachers is that the brothers go in 
twos” — is a reference to the Rule of St. Augustine, which as is known was adopted by the 
Dominicans: cf. Humbertus De Romanis, De vita regulari, ed. J.J. Berthier, 2 vols. (Torino: 
Marietti, 1956), 1:244-248. For all the biographical and hagiographic references, the 
Encomium’s principal source (although not direct) is Guglielmo da Tocco (d. 1323), 
Vita S. Thomae Aquinatis, fasc. 2 of Fontes vitae S. Thomae Aquinatis, ed. D. Priimmer 
(Saint Maximin, Var: Libr. Saint-Thomas-d’Aquin, 1924); for a more recent edition, see 
S. Thomae Aquinatis vitae fontes praecipuae, ed. Angelico Ferrua (Alba: Edizioni domeni- 
cane, 1968). 


[PDF page 194]
174 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
In fact, it is precisely these final arguments that made Valla’s Encomium 
famous and unique (both for his contemporaries and for the history of 
humanist and theological culture). They are what give the panegyric a pre- 
cise historical significance in the tradition of anti-Thomism. Indeed, on 
account of these final arguments the Encomium should be seen as a defin- 
ing point of reference for the shift in Thomism and theological culture in 
the fifteenth century. They constitute the pivotal point for all of Valla’s 
anti-scholastic theological writing. 
The last words of the passage quoted above (“whom I would set him 
[Thomas] above and whom I would call his equal”) indicate that the stylis- 
tic device of the comparatio will continue to be used in this part of the 
speech to elaborate the theme of knowledge (as it was previously for vir- 
tue) — but with a decisive variation: the use of this literary device takes on 
a theological valence for the critical argumentation that follows. The 
transposition of the comparatio from virtue to knowledge, then, is any- 
thing but formal. It will take Valla’s oration to the center of the theological 
debate surrounding neo-Thomism in the fifteenth century. 
It was Valla himself who, in the commemorative debate held in the 
temple of Minerva on 7 March 1457 for the feast of St. Thomas, identified 
the essential nucleus of the theological controversy surrounding contem- 
porary Thomism. Accordingly, he gave his speech the specific character of 
a response (and such is exactly how the very short Encomium was received) 
in opposition to the opinions expressed by those who had preceded him 
in the course of that debate. The fifteenth-century scholastic revival of 
Thomism was in fact a quaestio disputata, and it was as such — in accor- 
dance with an ancient custom and a traditional form — that it was treated 
on the feast of Aquinas, before a devout and learned audience that 
watched from under the gothic naves of the Roman church, the official 
temple of the Order of Preachers. The information provided by Valla on 
this point, which is quite noteworthy and valuable in and of itself, receives 
confirmation from other sources.*4 
It can easily be seen from the text of the Encomium that the positions 
argued by the participants in the debate (preceding Valla’s oration) on the 
revival of contemporary Thomism tended to affirm, at least implicitly, 
Aquinas’s historical primacy as Doctor of the universal Church and, 
44 Uberto Guidi also expressed his opposition to the Thomist current during a disputa- 
tion held in the church of S. Maria Novella, in 1315, “in the presence of religious clerics and 
learned laymen”: Taurisano, Discepoli e biografi, 29. Cf. Kristeller, Medieval Aspects, 62 and 
nn. 117 and 38. [See also p. 147 above. Eds. ] 


[PDF page 195]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 175 
consequently, to exalt the Summa’s theological system as normative for all 
further theological study. In his speech Valla attempted to reveal the foun- 
dation and highlight the premises, both explicit and implicit, on which 
these positions were based. In point of fact, Renaissance neo-Thomism 
encapsulated the triple iconographic theme of the “triumph,” where 
Aquinas had become a symbol for the theoretical convergence of Greek 
and Latin patristics, the Christian transcendence of Hellenic and Arabic 
culture, and the definitive refutation of philosophical, religious, and dog- 
matic heresy. In Valla’s eyes, the apologetics of that neo-Thomism obvi- 
ously converged in the organization, by then considered complete and 
definitive, of argumentative and methodological formulations normative 
for any and all kinds of speculative theology. A neo-Thomism already rig- 
orously systematized and formalized for philosophical and theological 
speculation — thus it had to appear to Valla. Here are his words: 
It has not escaped me that certain people who held an oration here today on 
the same subject not only made Thomas second to none of the doctors of 
the Church but also placed him above them all .... The reason they gave for 
being able to put him above everyone is that for proof in theology he used 
logic, metaphysics, and all philosophy, which the earlier doctors are sup- 
posed to have barely tasted with the tips of their tongues.*® 
2.5. Valla’s Critique of Scholasticism and the Controversy between 
Thomism and Anti-Thomism in the Fifteenth Century 
The passage immediately following the one just cited is of extreme impor- 
tance, as it suggests references and observations for reconstructing, from 
within the spare, yet extremely dense Encomium, a retrospective view of 
Valla’s entire literary production. The text does not merely contain the 
premises for the subsequent argumentation of Valla’s clearly enunciated 
anti-Thomist thesis. It is at the same time a pointed reference to the spe- 
cific and constant theme — ubiquitous in Valla’s corpus — of the crisis of 
contemporary theology and, on the positive side, of the methodological 
renewal of theological study. What is more, this passage of the Encomium 
also provides confirmation that Valla was well aware of what was at stake 
in the fifteenth-century controversy between Thomism and anti-Thomism; 
his is a sufficiently full and sophisticated vision of the theoretical implica- 
tions (of method, even more so than of content) for the study of theology 
strictly speaking. This passage also shows, on the subjective plane of 
45 Valla, Encomion, 13.147-156 (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 196]
176 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Valla’s role as an intellectual, the secure grasp which he had by then 
reached of the historico-cultural import of his own critique of 
scholasticism. 
It should thus not surprise us to find, here at this point in the Encomium, 
a recapitulation of what Valla had previously written in his Elegantiae 
(Elegances of the Latin Language), in De libero arbitrio, in the Adnotationes 
in Novum Testamentum, and above all in the Antidota (Remedies), a series 
of invectives against Poggio Bracciolini that functions as an apologia pro 
vita sua, a programmatic defense of his life. Let us now turn to the text of 
the Encomium: 
This is a slippery and perilous place for me, not only on account of the dig- 
nity of the saint we are praising, but also because of the deep-set opinion, 
held by so many, that no one can become a theologian without the precepts 
of the dialecticians, metaphysicians, and the other philosophers. What am I 
to do then? Shrink in fear, make an about-face, disguise what I think, and 
have my tongue contradict my heart? Since it was not of my own accord but 
at the entreaty of the brothers that I rose to speak, and since it is not my way 
to remain silent, I shall not give anyone cause to think that I have not spoken 
my mind.*6 
Valla, then, has ascended the pulpit of the Minervan temple at the press- 
ing request of the Dominican brothers. The historic Roman monastery 
hosts a religious community that is both numerous and diverse, with 
many different nationalities converging there from the various countries 
of Europe. What is more, it is also the seat of the Provincial Prior (of the 
“Roman Province”), the Master General of the Order, and the General 
Curia. The commemorative debate for the feast of St. Thomas, therefore, 
was planned and organized by the Dominicans of the Minerva themselves, 
and put on for a cultivated Roman public of both clerics and laymen. 
The decision to invite Valla to participate in the debate was by no 
means random. He was by then a well-known personage: professor of 
rhetoric at the Roman Studio, known and fiercely discussed in the liveliest 
cultural centers across the entire peninsula, recognized by opposite camps 
as the head of a “new school’ of Italian humanism, opposed and accused 
of heresy for his radical criticism of contemporary scholasticism and his 
interpretive stance on the Vulgate Bible and the Donation of Constantine. 
In spite of his notorious theological and ecclesiological ideas, Valla had 
been taken into the service of Nicholas V. A translator of Greek classics for 
the Vatican Library (directed by Giovanni Tortelli, the person closest to 
46 Tbid., 14.157-164. 


[PDF page 197]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 177 
him culturally and a most loyal friend), he was considered by all (even by 
his adversaries) to be a qualified member of the papal curia. And what is 
most important to stress here, he enjoyed close friendships (partly on 
account of common philological interests) with Dominicans then living in 
Rome. The invitation extended to Valla by the Minervan friars had to 
mean that they were taking a contrary position in the celebrative debate 
on the life and works of Thomas Aquinas. 
Now, if Valla’s teaching in Rome and his constant polemic against scho- 
lasticism, which was gaining force in the 1450s (under the pontificates of 
Nicholas V and Callixtus III), had reached the dimensions and the intel- 
lectual importance that we believe should be attributed to them, and if 
Valla’s work and extremely eccentric personality provoked reactions, 
albeit of all different kinds, at the highest levels of political culture, it must 
be concluded that the author of the Encomium had by then acquired a 
position of prestige that could no longer be underestimated, particularly 
within the context of the controversy between Thomism and anti- 
Thomism. Nor could this fact have escaped the interests of a cultural cen- 
ter like the Dominican monastery of the Minerva. In Rome, in March of 
1457, the opposite occurred of what had happened in Naples in April 1444. 
In Naples Valla had been subjected to an inquisitorial trial by influential 
Dominicans of the “Aragonese Province.” In Callixtus III’s Rome, he was 
personally invited by the Dominicans of the Minervan congregation to 
participate in a public debate as an authoritative critic of the Thomist 
renewal. At the conclusion of Valla’s oration, they would not have been 
surprised. Nor would they have reacted — this we can only suppose, but 
with a high degree of probability — like Cardinal d’Estouteville, who, as 
Gaspare da Verona reports, “after hearing Lorenzo Valla speak in praise of 
the most saintly Thomas Aquinas here, in the church of S. Maria sopra 
Minerva, believed the orator to be insane.”*” 
47 Gaspare da Verona, De gestis tempore Pauli II, in idem, Le vite di Paolo II di Gaspare da 
Verona e Michele Canensi, ed. Giuseppe Zippel (Citta di Castello: S. Lapi, 1904), 33: “quum 
audivisset L. Vallam de laudibus sanctissimi Thomae Aquinatis oratorem hic, in templo 
sanctae Mariae supra Minervam, illum insanire iudicavit’ (emphasis added). For the inquis- 
itorial trial in Naples, see: Fois, Il pensiero cristiano di Lorenzo Valla, 373-382; Camporeale, 
Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 201-202; and above all Giovanni Di Napoli, Lorenzo 
Valla. Filosofia e religione nell’Umanesimo italiano (Roma: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 
1971), 279-312. On the Dominican bishop Giovanni Garcia, whom Valla mentions in rela- 
tion to his trial (beyond the indications in Fois, Il pensiero cristiano, passim), see Acta 
Capitulorum Generalium Ordinis Praedicatorum, in Monumenta Ordinis fratrum 
Praedicatorum historia, t. VIII, vol. III (1380-1498), ed. Benedictus Maria Reichert (Roma: In 
domo generalitia, 1900), 195. Concerning the composition of the Dominican community in 
the Minervan convent, an important notarial document of 1449 was discovered and 


[PDF page 198]
178 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
2.6. The Stylistic Qualities of Thomas's Writings and the Canons 
of Latin Rhetoric 
Let us now turn from the historico-cultural context of the Encomium to 
the textual analysis of its final pages. Here, still within the frame of a pan- 
egyric, Valla’s discourse ascends to the highest level of clarification and 
argumentative rigor. Its aim is to formulate a humanist principle of theol- 
ogy to act as an alternative to fifteenth-century scholasticism. Decisively 
and with a full dose of irony, Valla contrasts the decadent theology of his 
contemporaries with the intellectual stature of Thomas. He exalts him as 
the historical model of the theologian and judges the value of his work by 
its literary style, vastness of erudition, and doctrinal profundity and com- 
pleteness. Valla’s parameters clearly follow the criteria outlined in 
Institutio oratoria, books X and XI (and parallel passages). Valla attributes 
the style (elocutio) of Thomas’s writing, thus distinguishing it from that of 
his own contemporaries sitting in the audience, with specific qualities 
(and under the double aspect of res et verba) aimed at highlighting its 
Attic character and doctrinal erudition. An analysis of these rhetorical 
qualities (standard categories from the Ad Herennium to Cicero and 
Quintilian), which are here correlated with the various levels of style, will 
reveal what historico-literary place the Encomium attributes to Thomas’s 
corpus. Valla writes: 
[highly praise the exceptional simplicity (subtilitas) of St. Thomas’s writing; 
I admire his carefulness (diligentia); 1am amazed at the fullness (copia), the 
variety (varietas), the completeness (absolutio) of his teachings. I add 
another thing, with which many people would not credit him but which he 
himself is supposed to have said: that he never read (legere) any book that he 
did not fully understand. This is something that no one of our time can 
claim: no jurist in civil law, no doctor in medicine, no philosopher in phi- 
losophy, no humanist in the reading (/ectio) of ancient texts, nor anyone else 
in the remaining arts and sciences, much less one man in all fields.48 
“I praise the simplicity (subtilitas) of his writing”: subtilitas properly con- 
cerns argumentative prose, or better, linkage in probative discourse. It 
consists in the absence of ornatus (adornment), which would obscure the 
essential lines or somehow unravel the fabric of its demonstrative 
published by Innocenzo Taurisano, Beato Angelico (Roma: Fratelli Palombi, 1955), 148-149; 
but cf. also Gilles Meersseman, “La bibliothéque des Fréres Précheurs de la Minerve a la fin 
du XVe siécle,” in Mélanges Auguste Pelzer (Louvain: Bibliothéque de l'Université, Bureaux 
du “Recueil,” 1947), 605-631. 
48 Valla, Encomion, 15.165-172. 


[PDF page 199]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 179 
procedure. Indeed, subtilitas is the property — exalted in Attic literature, 
which was known for its studied purity and plainness of style — that char- 
acterized the last of the three kinds of rhetoric (genera dicendi): high, or 
elevated (grandis or sublimis), middle (mediocris or modicus), and simple, 
or humble (subtilis or humilis). Cicero, in the tripartite distribution of the 
orator’s various tasks (to persuade the audience with the “high” style, 
which appeals to emotions or sentiments; to evoke the sense of taste or 
beauty with the “middle” style; to educate and teach with the “simple” 
style, which appeals to the listener’s rational faculty) always points out 
that the genus subtile is proper to pedagogical (in docendo) and demon- 
strative (in probando) discourse. Quintilian gives a similar definition when 
speaking of the rhetorical style of the Greek Lysias: 
simple and elegant, nothing more perfect can be found if the orator seeks 
only to teach. For there is nothing in it that is empty, nothing far-fetched; it 
is more like a clear spring than a great river.*9 
Would it exceed the limits of this passage of the Encomium if, within this 
context of rhetorical critique, we were to note that Valla seems to be 
applying Quintilian’s description of Lysias’ literary style to the quaestiones 
of the Summa theologiae? At any rate, a more than superficial reading of 
the Encomium cannot fail to notice that Valla, by exalting the subtilitas of 
their prose, situated Aquinas’s works in the literary tradition of the Latin 
Fathers. As Marrou and Auerbach in particular have shown, the patristic 
tradition, especially from Augustine on, had theorized and developed the 
sermo humilis (humble style) of Christian language, in which the lowest of 
the classical genres of rhetoric was deployed for theology. Indeed, the 
Christian orator and writer, conforming to the stylistic forms of Sacred 
Scripture in order to achieve the utmost accessibility and comprehension 
on the part of the faithful, had to assimilate his own language to the Word 
made flesh, where the “sublimity” of the divine mystery was embodied in 
the “humility of the passion.” 
“I admire his carefulness (diligentia)”: diligentia, which is closely con- 
nected to subtilitas, is another quality typical of Attic style. But here the 
focus is on the accurate choice of words and terms, and thus of precision 
and exactness of language, in argumentative discourse. Quintilian, follow- 
ing in the tradition of the Rhetorica ad Herennium and Cicero’s rhetorical 
works, speaks of the “utmost carefulness in words” and names C. Asinius 
49 Quintilian, Institutio oratoria, X.1.78: “subtilis atque elegans et quo nihil, si oratori 
satis sit docere, quaeras perfectius; nihil enim est inane, nihil arcessitum, puro tamen fonti 
quam magno flumini propior.” 


[PDF page 200]
180 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Pollio as an instance of such linguistic precision.°° Need it be said that, in 
calling attention to this pair of stylistic properties (subtilitas/diligentia), 
Valla could not have described Aquinas’s writing more precisely? Without 
a doubt Valla has in mind above all the prose of the Summa and the scrip- 
tural Expositiones (Commentaries), works of Thomas on which he draws 
directly for the purposes of his anti-scholastic polemic. 
“I am amazed at the fullness (copia), the variety (varietas), the com- 
pleteness (absolutio) of his teachings”: here we turn from the literary form 
of Thomas’s writings to their doctrinal content. The absolutio of which 
Valla speaks refers specifically to the completeness of Aquinas’s philo- 
sophical and theological thought, with particular reference — as seems 
likely from the context — to the Christian interpretation of Hellenic thought 
(especially along the lines of Thomas’s polemics and apologetics against 
Averroes). Quintilian’s terminology is illuminating for understanding 
what Valla means by the expression, “completeness of his doctrines” (abso- 
lutio doctrinarum). A component of Cicero’s vocabulary of preceptive rhet- 
oric (De inventione I. 22.32), the word (as an adjective, absolutus) had been 
defined and made extremely technical by Quintilian (Institutio oratoria, 
VII.4.3—-9). He recasts it as the Latin term for a particular type of forensic 
argumentation (called kat‘antilépsin) that, in the school of Hermagoras, 
consisted in the transformation of an accusation into its opposite: by 
means of a contrary and skillfully elaborated interpretation, the incrimi- 
nated action is turned into an element in defense of the accused. 
If absolutio defines the doctrinal scope of Thomas’s works, the pair 
copial/varietas (fullness/variety) emphasizes the depth and the cultural 
and intellectual dimensions of Aquinas’s theological speculation. More 
precisely, the double attribution should be understood as copia rerum et 
verborum (fullness of things and words) and varietas figurarum (variety of 
rhetorical figures), but with regard to both language and thought. Thus it 
should not be limited to the purely formal and literary aspect (in the 
Ciceronian meaning: “a fullness of words and a variety of rhetorical figures 
must be employed”*!), but rather must be understood as extended to and 
including the conceptual and thematic richness of Thomas’s theological 
system. The reference, then, that determines the meaning and semantic 
range of the pair copia/varietas again comes from chapters one and two of 
book X of Quintilian’s Institutio. 
5° Jbid., IV.2.116-18: “summa diligentia in verbis”; for Asinius Pollio, see ibid., X.2.113; 
2.25. 
5! Cicero, De finibus, II.3.10: “verborum sumenda copia est et varietas figurarum.” 


[PDF page 201]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 181 
Confirmation of what has been said about the stylistic and doctrinal 
descriptions of Thomas's works is found in Valla’s significant mention of 
lectio as a tool and as a source of learning and methodology in Aquinas’s 
theological study. Lectio, or close, detailed reading, is the engine of philo- 
logical study, the analytical foundation for the examination and compre- 
hension of the auctoritates (authorities). It is therefore the methodological 
basis and the guiding principle for the acquisition of knowledge, both for 
the orator, according to Quintilian (Jnstitutio oratoria, 1.8), and for the 
theologian, according to the humanist Valla (cf. the prefaces to the 
Elegantiae and the Disputationes). 
But there is more — and this observation comes much closer to the idea 
undergirding the passage in question of Valla’s Encomium. Lectio deter- 
mines and defines the cultural education, the paideia, proper to the ora- 
tor. Through /ectio, conducted along the didactic lines traced by Quintilian, 
the orator recovers, assimilates, and appropriates for himself the entire 
cultural tradition (literary, historiographical, philosophical, and rhetori- 
cal) of Greek and Roman classical antiquity. The whole of book X of the 
Institutio is dedicated precisely to this program of reading indispensable 
to the future orator. For Valla (who in this respect follows in the footsteps 
of the best tradition of early Italian humanism), the erudition of 
Quintilian’s rhetoric is constitutive of culture in general and of theology in 
particular. According to Valla, without the proper erudition the theolo- 
gian falls into formalism and exhausts himself in the course of his own 
speculation. Following the example of Aquinas, the theologian ought 
instead to effect an almost ancillary integration of all the arts and sciences 
in support of the theological disciplines. It should be noted that Valla con- 
stantly insisted on this cultural foundation for the scientia rerum divina- 
rum (the science of divine truths, i.e. theology) as part of his polemic 
against contemporary scholasticism’s conceptualism and strict reliance 
on logic. This point will receive greater clarity and definition in the follow- 
ing section of the Encomiwm.°? 
52 Subtilitas and sermo humilis: cf. Leeman, Orationis ratio (1974), 23-30 (Rhetorica ad 
Herennium), 126-128 and 188-193 (Cicero), 431ff. (Quintilian); W. Peterson (ed.), Quintiliani 
Institutionis oratoriae liber X (Oxford: Clarendon, 1903), 55-56 (notes to ch. 1.78); Erich 
Auerbach, Lingua letteraria e pubblico nella tarda antichita e nel Medioevo (Milano: 
Feltrinelli, 1974), 31-79 [English ed. = Literary Language and its Public in Late Latin Antiquity 
and in the Middle Ages (New York: Pantheon Books, 1965)]; Henri-Irénée Marrou, Saint 
Augustin et la fin de la culture antique (Paris: E. de Boccard, 1958), 505-545. Diligentia: 
Leeman, Orationis ratio (1974), 207-212, 251, 40—48; Peterson (ed.), Quintiliani Institutionis, 
74 (ch. 1.113). Copia: Leeman, Orationis ratio (1974), 123, 138, 158, 172-174, 432-434. Doctrina: 
Leeman, Orationis ratio (1974), 57, 271-73, 426-30 and 4goff. In the liturgical texts for the 


[PDF page 202]
182 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
2.7. The Critique of Scholastic Speculation and the Humanist 
Refounding of Theological Study 
From the almost emblematic exaltation of Aquinas as the historical 
model of theological thought in the medieval scholastic tradition, Valla’s 
panegyric now turns to the systematic and theoretical plane of Thomism. 
It is precisely at this point of the Encomium that the laudatory probatio is 
inverted, becoming a refutatio of the metaphysical speculation that 
underlies the categorical and epistemological structure of Thomist theol- 
ogy. This refutation obliquely concerns the method of the Summa theolo- 
giae, but its central and explicit object is to criticize and directly oppose 
the revival of neo-Thomism taking place in Valla’s time. And it is pre- 
cisely this shift in perspective (from medieval to contemporary scholasti- 
cism, from past to present) that gives the Encomium its specific historical 
and theoretical importance. Here is the pivotal moment of Valla’s dis- 
course, the center-point around which it revolves, the thing that makes it 
a watershed cultural document and above all an essential source for the 
relationship between humanism and scholasticism in the fifteenth cen- 
tury. Is it not here, in the extremely dense and synthetic form of the 
Encomium, that Valla’s life-long polemic against scholasticism achieved 
its highest, most complete elaboration? But let us now analyze the vari- 
ous arguments and aspects of the work, tracing its basic literary progres- 
sion and noting its allusions and textual references. In the second part of 
this essay we will then be able to reconstruct a full picture of its ideas and 
context. 
Valla enunciates his own view of the “science of divine truths” — a view 
that entails the critique of scholastic theological speculation and a human- 
ist refounding of theological study — by way of a theoretical and historical 
saint’s feast, Thomas’s writing is described thus: “his style is concise, his eloquence pleas- 
ing: his thought is lofty, intelligible, and powerful” (stilus brevis, grata facundia; celsa clara 
firma sententia”), Breviarium ... Ordinis Praedicatorum, in die. Erasmus will take up the 
same line: “Moreover, Thomas Aquinas was a great man not only for his times. For to my 
mind none of the modern theologians possesses equal carefulness, a greater soundness of 
mind, or a firmer erudition: and he clearly would have been capable of mastering lan- 
guages and the other aspects of the good arts, since he was so well acquainted with the 
ones available in his time” (Desiderius Erasmus, Annotationes in Novum Testamentum, 
Rom. 1:5, in idem, Opera omnia, ed. Joannes Clericus [Jean LeClerc], 10 vols. (Lugduni 
Batavorum [Leiden]: cura et impensis Petri Vander Aa, 1703-1706) [facsimile reprint = 
Hildesheim: Olds, 1962], VI, col. 554: “Thomas Aquinas, vir alioqui non suo tantum seculo 
magnus. Nam meo quidem animo nullus est recentium theologorum, cui par sit diligentia, 
cui sanius ingenium, cui solidior eruditio: planeque dignus erat, cui linguarum quoque 
peritia, reliquaque bonarum litterarum supellex contingeret, qui iis que per eam tempes- 
tatem dabantur tam dextre sit usus”). 


[PDF page 203]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 183 
comparison between “ancient” and “modern” phases of Christian thought. 
Articulating his discourse by means of comparative references to scholas- 
ticism and to the Greek and Latin Fathers — and making use of themes and 
formulations he had already fully elaborated in parallel passages of other 
works — Valla executes his comparison between the two theologies on 
both an epistemological and an historiographical level. 
The contrary distinctions in epistemological foundation and historico- 
cultural periodization of the two theologies indubitably remains, in Valla’s 
work, on the level of generalization and essential features. Not until 
Erasmus and his theological and scriptural controversy (with Martin 
Dorp and the “Louvainists”) will the respective scientific principles of 
scholastic and patristic theology be precisely defined and compared on an 
historical and historiographical level. Nevertheless, it is Valla’s ideas and 
formulations that will be borrowed and transformed (directly and with 
full cognizance on the part of early-sixteenth-century theologians) in 
the later understanding of scholasticism and patristic theology. Here, 
obviously, we shall limit ourselves to describing the theoretical and histo- 
riographical distinction between ancient (veteres or antiqui) and modern 
(recentes or novi) theologians as understood and described by Valla.°? 
After dealing with Thomas’s style and thought, Valla continues: 
Those things which they call metaphysics and modes of signifying and the 
like, which modern theologians regard with wonder like a newly discovered 
sphere or like the epicycles of the planets, I regard with no great wonder at 
all. Nor do I think, therefore, that it matters much whether one knows them 
or not. And perhaps it is preferable not to know them, as they are like 
impediments to better things. This I will make clear not with my own argu- 
ments (although I could) but by citing the authority of the ancient theolo- 
gians — Cyprian, Lactantius, Hilary, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine — who were 
so far from treating such matters in their works that they did not even men- 
tion them.*4 
According to Valla, scholastic theologians professed to explain the dog- 
matics of revelation by making use, for speculative purposes, of concep- 
tual and argumentative tools like metaphysics, logic, the modes of 
53 Salvatore I. Camporeale, “Da Lorenzo Valla a Tommaso Moro. Lo statuto umanistico 
della teologia,” Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 4 (1973): 9-102 [reprinted in idem, Lorenzo valla. 
Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma. Studi e testi (Roma: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 
2002), 19-119]; Heinz Holeczek, Humanistische Bibelphilologie als Reformproblem bei 
Erasmus von Rotterdam, Thomas More und William Tyndale (Leiden: Brill, 1975), 138-165. 
See also Marie-Dominique Chenu, “Antiqui,’ ‘moderni.’ Notes de lexicographie médiévale,” 
Revues des Sciences Philosophiques et Théologiques 17 (1928): 82-94. 
54 Valla, Encomion, 16.173-181 (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 204]
184 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
signifying (modi significandi), “and the like.”>> But in doing so they trans- 
gressed the specific and irreducible boundaries of the things and the lan- 
guage that constitute the proper object of Christian faith; their endeavor 
was just as useless — for this seems to be the meaning of Valla’s compari- 
son — as the attempt to correct the internal incoherence of geocentric cos- 
mology by theorizing the ninth sphere and planetary epicycles. It might 
be mentioned that Valla’s words curiously echo the polemics found in the 
Byzantine Cosmas Indicopleustes’s Topographia christiana, a work (prob- 
ably written between 547 and 549) that was similarly critical of 
Aristotelianism (that of John Philoponus) and that sharply rejected any 
kind of synthesis between Greek science and Christian revelation. The 
immediate source for Valla’s scientific and astronomical knowledge, how- 
ever, was certainly Johannes de Sacrobosco’s treatise De sphaera mundi 
(On the Sphere of the World), an elementary text of the quadrivium.*® 
2.8. Philosophy as an ‘Impediment” to Authentic Christian 
Thought and the Distinction/Opposition between Patristic 
Theology and Scholasticism 
In the practice of the scholastics, philosophy functioned as a handmaiden 
to theology. Here it is described in a contrary way, as an “impediment” 
(impedimentum) to Christian thought, an obstacle blocking its most 
genuine and coherent development. Valla insists that the Latin Fathers, 
together with their Greek counterparts, had in some fashion foreseen the 
destination at which such a theoretical co-optation of Hellenic specula- 
tion would arrive, and that therefore they had rejected classical philoso- 
phy. He then goes on to inquire into the ancient (veteres) theologians’ 
primary motivation for having rejected this kind of philosophical specula- 
tion, after which he gives his own incisive reply. It should be emphasized 
that this reply accords with Valla’s standard interpretation of the episte- 
mological basis that, in his mind, underlies the theology of the Greek and 
Latin Fathers of the Church. 
5° Cf. the parallel passages of the Dialecticae disputationes cited in Camporeale, Lorenzo 
Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 178 and 229; and Alfonso Maier, Terminologia logica della 
tarda Scolastica (Roma: Ateneo, 1972), passim (index sub voce “modi significandi”). For a 
general view of the question: Eugenio Garin, Leducazione in Europa 1400/1600. Problemi e 
programmi (Bari: Laterza, 1976), 3-29. 
5® On Cosmas Indicopleustes: Salvatore Impellizzeri, La letteratura bizantina (Firenze: 
Sansoni, 1975), 186-189. For the scholastic use of De sphaera mundi and De modis significandi 
seu grammatica speculativa, cf. Armando F. Verde, Lo Studio Fiorentino 1473-1503. Ricerche e 
documenti, 6 vols. in 9 (Firenze: Istituto nazionale di studi sul Rinascimento, 1973), 2:641. 


[PDF page 205]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 185, 
The Fathers of the first centuries of Christianity rejected not only the 
categories of classical philosophy but also philosophical language itself, 
despite the excellent quality of their Latin (they were latinissimi) and 
their close acquaintance with Greek. They stand in contrast to modern 
(recentes) theologians, who, regarding classical languages, “do not know 
Greek” and in Latin are “nearly all barbarians.’”*” But how to explain, 
how to understand the Fathers’ rejection of philosophical theory and 
language? 
Why, then, should they not have treated these subjects? Because they were 
not supposed to be treated, and perhaps they were not even supposed to be 
known - and this for two reasons: one having to do with their contents (res), 
the other with their words (verba).58 
We immediately note that Valla’s argument runs along the axis of the rhe- 
torical relationship between res (contents) and verba (words). The polar- 
ization of the two terms is by no means merely formal; on the contrary, it 
underlies a precise line of argument, in which a particular historiographi- 
cal interpretation of the Church Fathers is offered and then infused into a 
humanist principle of theology, which is presented as an alternative to 
scholasticism. 
Let us first consider the formulation of Valla’s critique of scholasticism 
in relation to divine truths, the object of theological “science”: 
Regarding their contents: because these subjects did not seem to lead to the 
knowledge of divine truths. Such also seemed to be the case to the Greek 
theologians Basil, Gregory, John Chrysostom, and the others of that age. 
They did not think that the sophisms of dialectics, the obscurities of meta- 
physics, or the trifles of the modes of signifying should be mixed in with 
sacred questions. Nor did they even lay the foundations of their disputa- 
tions in philosophy, for they heeded Paul’s exclamation: “not through phi- 
losophy and vain deceit” [Col. 2:8]. This we know from experience as 
well.99 
Philosophy, then, is defined once again on the basis of dialectics, meta- 
physics, and the modes of signifying. And it is as such, according to Valla, 
that it was rejected not only by the Latin Fathers named earlier but also by 
the greatest figures in the Greek patristic tradition: “Basil, Gregory, and 
John Chrysostom” (the same trio of Greek Fathers that recurs in identical 
thematic contexts in other passages in Valla’s corpus). Let us note in 
57 Valla, Encomion, 17.183-184. 
58 [bid., 17.184-186 (emphasis added). 
59 Jbid., 18.187—-195. 


[PDF page 206]
186 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
passing that the Gregory mentioned is Gregory Nazianzen, whose Oration 
against Julian, to which Valla is implicitly referring here, is echoed in cer- 
tain statements of De vero falsoque bono.°° 
It is clear, then, that Valla identifies philosophy with the conceptualiza- 
tion and speculation of logic, ontology, and grammar, i.e. with the scien- 
tific and methodological theoretics of the Aristotelian-Boethian tradition 
and of scholasticism in general. And it is also in this sense that he under- 
stands the term “philosophy” as used by Paul in Colossians 2:8. Paul is not 
only the orator par excellence, as will be said later, but also the rhetorician 
who carries forward, into the realm of theology, the polemic against phi- 
losophy that had been articulated earlier by Isocrates and would later be 
taken up by Quintilian. For Valla, Paul is the Christian rhetorician who 
lays the new theoretical foundations of theology (institutio theologica), 
which were grasped and consciously assimilated by the greatest Latin and 
Greek Fathers of the Church. 
The citation of Colossians 2:8 (which can also be found elsewhere, and 
with the same connotations, in Valla’s corpus) should thus not be thought 
of as a mere appeal to authority. Rather, it must be understood as the 
foundation, or better, as the scriptural premise to a line of argument 
whose aim is normatively to identify the guiding principle of the scientia 
rerum divinarum. The hollow abstraction and argumentation of philoso- 
phy — this is the sense suggested by the allusion to the New Testament 
passage — impedes theological reflection on divine truths, just as, accord- 
ing to Paul’s warning, it once hindered the Christians of Colosse from 
understanding the divine mysteries. 
2.9. The Reduction of Philosophy to Rhetoric and Valla’s 
Quintilianism: Institutio oratoria, Book XII, Chapter 2.7—20 
Up to now, Valla’s critique of philosophy — concerning the specific object, 
the res, of theological discourse — has been inspired by a particular phase 
(patristics) of Christian thought, and it has been founded on Paul’s scrip- 
tural testimony (Col. 2:8). Later on, these two foundational elements will 
be taken up again and refined. But now, Valla’s argument shifts decisively 
6° Bk. III, ch. g: Valla, Scritti filosofici e religiosi, 197; cf. Fois, Il pensiero cristiano di 
Lorenzo Valla, 166 and n. 272. 
° De vero falsoque bono, bk. III, ch. 12: Valla, Scritti filosofici e religiosi, 204; Fois, Il pen- 
siero cristiano di Lorenzo Valla, 188-192 and 5u. On Col. 2:8: O. Michel, “Philosophia, phi- 
losophos,” in Gerhard Kittel and Gerhard Friedrich (eds.), Theologisches Worterbuch zum 
Neuen Testament, 10 vols. (Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer, 1931-1979), 9:169-185; Heinrich 
Schlier, Il tempo della Chiesa. Saggi esegetici (Bologna: Il Mulino, 1968), 330-372. 


[PDF page 207]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 187 
from historical demonstration (the recovery of patristic theology) to 
normative argumentation. The latter is based on the very nature of the res 
of theology, and it is articulated along the lines of Quintilian’s rhetoric, 
following the epistemological scheme of the second chapter of book XII 
of the Institutio. 
In passing we might note that chapter 2, book XII of the Institutio, 
along with chapter 1, book X, have already been identified as the two 
most significant passages of Quintilian’s corpus for understanding the 
methodological problem and solutions that give the Encomium its 
historical and theoretical significance. In his panegyric of 1457, 
Valla revisits and draws to a close his “discourse on method,” which 
had been the object of intense reflection and intellectual effort ever 
since his Comparatio Ciceronis Quintilianique (Comparison of Cicero and 
Quintilian). These two writings, the earlier one programmatic, the later 
one recapitulating and reassembling his entire intellectual development, 
mark the beginning and the end, theoretically as well as chronologically, 
of his literary production.®? 
In the expository economy of the Jnstitutio, the second chapter of book 
XII summarizes the didactic articulation of the rhetorical paedeia pro- 
posed in the course of the work. It unites the diverse aspects and various 
levels of all of book XII (the final book of the Institutio), and thus together 
with the rest of the book it makes explicit the critique of philosophy 
underlying Quintilian’s whole work. Indeed, the chapter explains why the 
break between philosophy and rhetoric should be repaired and proposes 
a solution for doing so, namely through the assumption of the former into 
the latter, with rhetoric understood as the omni-comprehensive science 
of language. 
Since the orator is the “good man skilled in speaking” (vir bonus dicendi 
peritus), according to the ancient definition of Cato, he must excel all oth- 
ers in his knowledge of the natural world, civil and political institutions, 
moral values, and the linguistic and cultural structures related to them — 
in short, he must be intimately acquainted with the whole realm of human 
conduct and action. To this end, Quintilian puts the acquisition of this 
kind of knowledge into a perspective aimed at transcending the limits 
within which Cicero (in De oratore III) had divided the tasks of philosophy 
and rhetoric. That break between the two cultures, which Cicero had 
sought in vain (if not with equivocation) to repair, had little by little 
62 Fois, Il pensiero cristiano di Lorenzo Valla, 31-33; Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. 
Umanesimo e teologia, 89-100. 


[PDF page 208]
188 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
worsened, such that for Quintilian it remained only to propose rhetoric as 
the lone, valid “science” comprehending the entire encyclopedia of 
knowledge, and the rhetorician as the only kind of intellectual living in an 
organic relation to the civil and political society of his time. Since the path 
of philosophy leads far from civil and political action, from moral and 
institutional affairs, the rhetorician must decisively effect the definitive 
transcendence of philosophical wisdom. 
Quintilian’s text must be cited here, although we are forced to omit cer- 
tain sections that nevertheless should be read in loco (XII, 2.7—20) in order 
for its full significance and context to be comprehended. This passage is 
crucial for understanding Valla’s corpus, as well as for grasping his origi- 
nality in critically adopting — for he expands its power and application — 
the operative principle of reducing (reductio) all the disciplines, even 
theology, to rhetoric. Quintilian writes: 
I desire that he whose character I am seeking to mould should be a “wise 
man” in the Roman sense, that is, one who reveals himself as a true states- 
man, not in the discussions of the study, but in the actual practice and expe- 
rience of life. But inasmuch as the study of philosophy has been deserted by 
those who have turned to the pursuit of eloquence, and since philosophy no 
longer moves in its true sphere of action and in the broad daylight of the 
forum, but has retired first to porches and gymnasia and finally to the gath- 
erings of the schools, all that is essential for an orator, and yet is not taught 
by the professors of eloquence, must undoubtedly be sought from those per- 
sons in whose possession it has remained. The authors who have discoursed 
on the nature of virtue must be read through and through, that the life of the 
orator may be wedded to the knowledge of things human and divine .... O that 
the day may dawn when the perfect orator of our heart’s desire shall claim 
for his own possession that science that has lost the affection of mankind 
through the arrogance of its claims and the vices of some that have brought 
disgrace upon its virtues, and shall restore it to its place in the domain of 
eloquence, as though he had been victorious in a trial for the restoration of 
stolen goods! And since philosophy falls into three divisions, physics, ethics 
and dialectic, which, I ask you, of these departments is not closely connected 
with the task of the orator? Let us reverse the order just given and deal first 
with the third department which is entirely concerned with words. If it be true 
that to know the properties of each word, to clear away ambiguities, to 
unravel perplexities, to distinguish between truth and falsehood, to prove or 
to refute as may be desired, all form part of the functions of an orator, who is 
there that can doubt the truth of my contention? ... Proceeding to moral 
philosophy or ethics, we may note that it at any rate is entirely suited to the 
orator .... Physics or natural philosophy on the other hand is far richer than 
the other branches of philosophy, if viewed from the standpoint of provid- 
ing exercise in speaking, in proportion as a loftier inspiration is required to 
speak of things divine than of things human; and further it includes within 


[PDF page 209]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 189 
its scope the whole of ethics, which as we have shown are essential to the 
very existence of oratory ....6% 
The reduction of philosophy to rhetoric, as the omni-comprehensive sci- 
ence of res et verba, is thus absolute and radical in Quintilian. In the sec- 
tions omitted from the passage cited, Quintilian’s discourse descends into 
the particulars of the various branches and disciplines of philosophy in 
order to demonstrate rhetoric’s epistemological and methodological 
primacy.®4 
6§ Quintilian, Institutio oratoria, XII.2.7—20: “Ego illum, quem instituo, Romanum quen- 
dam velim esse sapientem, qui non secretis disputationibus, sed rerum experimentis atque 
operibus vere civilem virum exhibeat. Sed quia deserta ab his, qui se ad eloquentiam con- 
tulerunt, studia sapientiae non iam in actu suo atque in hac fori luce versantur, sed in 
porticus et in gymnasia primum, mox in conventus scholarum recesserunt: id, quod est 
oratori necessarium nec a dicendi praeceptoribus traditur, ab iis petere nimirum necesse 
est, apud quos remansit, evolvendi penitus auctores, qui de virtute praecipiunt, ut oratoris 
vita cum scientia divinarum rerum sit humanarumque coniuncta .... Utinamque sit tempus 
unquam, quo perfectus aliquis, qualem optamus, orator hanc artem superbo nomine et 
vitiis quorundam bona eius corrumpentium invisam vindicet sibi ac, velut rebus repetitis, 
in corpus eloquentiae adducat. Quae quidem cum sit in tris divisa partes, naturalem, 
moralem, rationalem, qua tandem non est cum oratoris opere coniuncta? Nam ut ordinem 
retro agamus, de ultima illa, quae tota versatur in verbis, nemo dubitaverit, si et proprie- 
tates vocis cuiusque nosse et ambigua aperire et perplexa discernere et de falsis iudicare et 
colligere ac resolvere quae velis oratorum est .... Jam quidem pars illa moralis, quae dicitur 
Ethice, certe tota oratori est accommodata .... Pars vero naturalis, cum est ad exercitatio- 
nem dicendi tanto ceteris uberior, quanto maiore spiritu de divinis rebus quam humanis 
eloquendum est, tum illam etiam moralem, sine qua nulla esse, ut docuimus, oratio potest, 
totam complectitur ...” (tr. E.H. Butler) (emphasis added). 
64 Leeman, Orationis ratio (1974), 395-424; Gerl, Rhetorik als Philosophie, 84-97. Here 
we cite Valla’s glosses to ch. 2, book XII of the Institutio oratoria contained in ms. Paris, Bibl. 
Nat., lat. 7723, ff.142v.-144r. [N.B. Not all the glosses transcribed by Camporeale are reported 
in Valla, Le postille all Institutio oratoria, and sometimes Camporeale’s readings differ from 
those in the edition.] On the basis of clear graphic evidence it seems obvious that the 
glosses were written at different times. Among other things, they constitute a series of 
statements and references that are illuminating for a comparative reading of the preface to 
book I of the first redaction of the Dialecticae disputationes. (We have printed the text of 
the preface from ms. Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Urb. lat. 1207 in 
Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 405-408). Valla’s glosses are transcribed 
here with the incipits of Quintilian’s text in italics and the standard paragraph numbers in 
brackets. 
“Quando igitur orator est vir bonus ... si forte accedamus iis [X11.2.1-2]: nature alone does 
not establish mores (non constare sola natura mores). // Ad illud sequens [4]: the orator 
must learn wisdom through and through (penitus perdiscendam oratori sapientiam). // Ac 
philosophos cum ea [5]: this must be sought or obtained from the philosophers (hanc esse 
petendam seu reperiendam a philosophis). // Quod Cicero pluribus libris [6]: as in the pref- 
ace to the first book of the Tusculans and On Fate (ut in proemio primi libri Tusculanarum 
et De fato). // Quapropter hec exhortatio [6]: the orator should not be a philosopher but a 
truly civic wise man of the Roman type. Lactantius, Book III [Do inst., ch. 14: PL 6:389—-90] 
writes against Cicero: ‘But how you confessed the truth about philosophy when instructing 
your son, advising that he should know the precepts of philosophy, but that he should live 


[PDF page 210]
190 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
as a citizen (non philosophum sed romanum quendam sapientem ac vere civilem esse 
oratorem debere. Lactantius Li II] in Ciceronem: ‘At quam fessus fueris philosophie verita- 
tem docens ad filium composita precepta, quibus mones philosophie quidem precepta 
noscenda, vivendum autem esse civiliter’). // Qués denique in ipsa [7]: Macrobius, from the 
Somnium Scipionis [11.17,8]: ‘Greece was as full of men wholly given to wisdom as Rome was 
bereft of them’ (Macrobius de Somnio Scipionis: ‘soli enim sapientie [otio] deditos ut 
abunde Grecia tulit, ita Roma nescivit’). // Atque ego illum, quem instituto [7]: this means 
that the philosophers did not treat of the republic completely, since they lacked experi- 
ence of it (hoc significat non perfecte philosophos de re publica tradidisse, quam experti 
non fuissent). // Evolvendi penitus [8]: the orator should read the philosophers (evolvendi 
oratori philosophos). // Que ipse quanto maiores [9]: the same material can be treated bet- 
ter by orators than by philosophers, and if only it were treated such that it not be so hateful 
on account of the vices of the philosophers and their reputation for pride. From this it is 
clear that neither Aristotle nor Plato were eloquent enough (eandem materiam tractari 
posse ab oratoribus melius quam a philosophis, et utinam tractetur ne tantopere sit invisa 
propter vitia philosophorum et superbum illorum nomen. Ex hoc constat nec Aristotelem 
nec Platonem satis eloquentes esse). // Superbo nomine et vitiis [9]: because philosophers 
want to be the only lovers of wisdom, as their name indicates (quia philosophi solos se 
sapientie volunt esse amatores, ut ipsorum nomen indicat). // De ultima illa, que tota ver- 
satur in verbis [10]: on dialectics (de dialectica). // Quanquam ea non tam [11]: how the 
orator uses it (quomodo ea utatur orator). // Ita, sitotum sibi vindicaverit [13]: pure dialectic 
is inconsistent with the forum (abhorret a foro mera dialectica [N.B. Camporeale’s text 
reads: meram dialecticam; this gloss is not reported in Valla, Le postille allInstitutio orato- 
ria; the editors of the present volume have not consulted ms. Paris, Bibl. Nat., Lat. 7723. 
Eds.]). // Iam pars illa moralis [15]: on moral philosophy [ethics] (de morali). // Sed ille vir 
bonus [17]: orators speak more easily and better about moral philosophy than philosophers 
(oratorum facilius ac melius moralem loqui quam philosophorum). // Profecto nemo dubi- 
tabit [18]: regarding general questions in philosophy (de generalibus questionibus in phi- 
losophia). // Pars vero naturalis [20]: on natural philosophy [physics] (de naturali). // 
Siquidem, ut nobis placet [21]: this is clear, for example, from the experience of the greatest 
orators (hoc constare vel experimento summorum oratorum). // Vim tamen quandam [22]: 
Aristophanes and Eupolis, Plato in the Phaedrus, Thucydides book I, in the letters of 
Demosthenes (Aristophanes Eupolisque, Plato in Phedro, Thucydides libro 1°, in epistolis 
Demosthenis). // Nam M. Tullius [23]: in The Orator, in Partitiones oratoriae (in Oratore, in 
Partitionibus). // Pyrron quidem [24]: Aulus Gellius, book u: ‘Those philosophers whom we 
call Pyrronists are called skeptétai in Greek, which means something like searchers and 
considerers: for they decide nothing, determine nothing, but they are always busy search- 
ing and considering what of all things in the world it is possible to decide or determine. Nor 
do they think that they see or hear anything clearly, but rather that they sense or are 
affected only as if they saw and heard, etc.’ Although the Pyrronists and the Academics say 
very similar things about this, they were thought to differ amongst themselves for several 
reasons but mostly on this account: that the Academics determine as it were that nothing 
itself can be determined, while the Pyrronists say that not even this seems to be at all true, 
since nothing seems to be true. (A. Gellius libro XI°: ‘Quos pyrrones philosophos vocamus 
ii greco cognomine skeptétai appellantur, id ferme significat quasi quesitores et considera- 
tores: nihil enim decernunt, nihil enim constituunt, sed in querendo semper consideran- 
doque sunt, quidnam sit omnium rerum de quo decerni constituique possit ac ne videre 
quoque quidem plane quicquam, neque audire sese putant, sed id pati afficique quasi 
videant vel audiant, etc.’ Cum hec autem ita consimiliter tam Pyrronei dicant quam 
Academici, differe tamen inter sese et propter alia quedam et vel maxime propterea exis- 
timati sunt, quod Academici quidem ipsum illud nihil posse decerni quasi decernunt, 
Pyrronei ne id quidem ullo pacto verum videri dicunt quod nihil esse verum videtur.) // 
Sed hec inter ipsos [26]: the task of the orator is greater than that of the philosopher, and 


[PDF page 211]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 191 
This passage is the source (as is also clear from textual similarities, as 
noted in italics) for the Encomium’s statement: 
For what is there in philosophy? I do not mean dialectics, the whole of which 
lies in words; I have already spoken about it and will do so again. No, I mean 
moral and natural philosophy. What is there in them that is indubitable and 
settled except the things discovered in natural philosophy through the 
observations (experimenta) of physicians and others?® 
Clearly, this criticism of contemporary scholasticism must be understood 
along Quintilian’s lines, and in the direct light of the Institutio’s book XII, 
chapter 2. Nevertheless, Valla does not simply follow Quintilian, and we 
would not understand the originality and the essence of his thought 
should we fail to specify its relationship to Quintilian’s text and to differ- 
entiate it from the ancient rhetorician’s theme. For here Valla goes far 
beyond — indeed, he proceeds in a divergent (if not a contrary) direction 
from — Quintilian’s classical theory of rhetoric. Quintilian wholly reduced 
the philosophical disciplines to rhetoric essentially on the basis of the 
omni-comprehensiveness of language, on account of which the totality of 
res and verba is the proper sphere of eloquence. Valla, on the other hand, 
although accepting this principle for dialectics, invokes a different one for 
moral and natural philosophy: the absolute (extra-philosophical) princi- 
ple of observation, or experience (experimentum). Indeed, it is empiricism 
and praxis on which the humanist Valla will base his critique of the 
Aristotelian-scholastic Physics and Ethics in his Dialecticae disputationes. 
Thus in Valla’s work rhetoric receives a new significance and equipage: 
the ars rhetorica comes to be defined as the method of philological criti- 
cism, a new episteme articulated and distinguished by its own principles 
and instruments of study. 
thus he should not cleave to any one sect of philosophy (maius esse opus oratoris quam 
philosophi, ideoque non debere se ad sectam aliquam philosophie astringere). // Quare in 
exemplum [27]: which philosophers he should especially read (quos precipue philosophos 
legat). // Exercitatione quidem [28]: in which parts of philosophy he should train himself 
(in quibus se partibus philosophie exerceat). // Neque ea solum que [29]: even more than 
the teachings of the philosophers he should read the famous words and deeds of the 
ancients (magis etiam quam precepta philosophorum, legenda dicta et facta veterum pre- 
clara). // Quantum enim greci [30]: this is in no way the same opinion as the one found in 
book III [ch. 34137] of Cicero’s De oratore: ‘For as examples of virtue are to be sought in our 
own people, thus examples of learning are to be sought in them’ (non est hec eadem 
omnino sententia que apud Ciceronem in Ilo De Oratore: ‘Nam ut virtutis a nostris sic 
doctrine sunt ab illis exempla repetenda’).” 
65 Valla, Encomion, 18.195-198 (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 212]
192 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
2.10. The Linguistic-Semantic Critique of Scholasticism and the 
Interrelation between Greek and Latin: Paul’s “Genuine Mode of 
Theologizing” and Valla’s Paulinism 
The critique of scholastic theology, as was said above, operates on two 
axes: the one categorical and semantic, the other linguistic and formal. 
The first concerns divine truths, the object of theology insofar as theology 
is the “science” of those things. The second properly regards the concep- 
tual body of lexemes used in theological discourse. Valla had said there 
were two reasons for his opposition to scholasticism and his call for a 
rebirth of patristic theology, which he went on to express with the correla- 
tive pair, essential to rhetoric, of signified and signifier: “one having to do 
with their contents (res), the other with their words (verba).” And so 
Valla’s argument, having dealt with the subject of theology’s object and 
contents, now turns to examining the linguistic issue of Aristotelian- 
scholastic terminology, which it identifies as the (historical and theoreti- 
cal) break between ancient and modern theologians. 
Regarding their words: because the nature of Greek is different from that of 
Latin. This would be a rather tedious subject to discuss, and it is a question 
for another time. Let it suffice to have said that the Latin doctors of the 
Church dreaded words which the great Latin authors (who were their teach- 
ers in the language), although experts in Greek, never used, words that are 
continually pressed into service by modern theologians: ens, entitas, quid- 
ditas, identitas, reale, essentiale, suum esse, as well as those terms which are 
given names like ampliari, dividi, componi, and other such things. Thus these 
largely worthless trifles were either not to be treated, or else they were to be 
disregarded, lest they lead to greater ignorance.®* 
This passage of the Encomium, once again synthetically dense and expressed 
in concentric abbreviations, provides a retrospective summary of Valla’s 
essential ideas. An integral part of Valla’s work as a humanist was the lin- 
guistic-semantic critique of the philosophical and theological terminology 
of scholasticism and, more precisely, of the creation and formulation of 
Aristotelian-scholastic language as begun by Boethius. Indeed, it is impor- 
tant to note how Valla’s critique, simultaneously philological and theoreti- 
cal — in accord with a particularly humanist mode of analysis that sees the 
two aspects as inseparable — takes shape in the specific question of the rela- 
tionship between the Greek and Latin languages and the issue of translat- 
ing between them. Valla then goes on to treat this problem in greater depth 
°° Ibid., 19.199-207 (emphasis added). [On the scholastic terminology in this passage, 
see n. 9 on p. 3u1 below. Eds.] 


[PDF page 213]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 193 
with regard to its various manifestations in scholasticism, from biblical 
exegesis to formal logic. Ultimately, he comes to consider it within the 
broader context of the relationship between language and culture in gen- 
eral, the one intimately connected to and historically defined in the other: 
that is, in the relationship between formal expression and content, of signi- 
fier and signified, on converging synchronic and diachronic planes. 
To my mind, this variegated and complex theme underlies all Valla’s 
works from the Elegantiae to the Adnotationes in Novum Testamentum. 
The reference to a fuller treatment of the “nature of Latin” and the “nature 
of Greek,” which the Encomium’s author makes a point of emphasizing, 
has greater meaning than it might at first seem. We shall confine ourselves 
here to explaining this reference with writings Valla composed around the 
same time as the Encomium, writings in which this theme can be seen 
most clearly: the preface to the Latin translation of Thucydides’ History 
(1452) and the inaugural lecture “in principio sui studii” (of 1455).°7 
The problem of the relationship between Greek and Latin and the issue 
of translating between them is without a doubt one of the central themes 
that Valla derives directly from Quintilian. The latter, as Leeman has writ- 
ten and as we would confirm without any hesitation, “seems to have been 
the first fully to realize the fundamental differences between the two lan- 
guages.”©5 They key passage is chapter 10 of book XII of the Institutio (and 
parallel passages, such as book VIII, chapter 3). Valla, however, delved 
deeper into the problem, attacking the entire categorical terminology that 
was derived from Aristotelianism and that, from Boethius on, had been 
transferred to scholasticism. This linguistic transfer, or transition, particu- 
larly interested Valla insofar as it concerned theological language, espe- 
cially in the translation of the New Testament from Greek into the Latin 
of the Vulgate. 
According to Valla, the scholastic importation of philosophical and theo- 
logical language from the Greek writings of Aristotle to medieval Latin cul- 
ture was carried out by means of a mechanical transposition and not 
through a process guided by analogical correlations. The latter procedure 
67 The “preface” to Thucydides’ History will be treated in part III, section 5 below. For the 
Oratio in principio sui studii, cf. Fois, Il pensiero cristiano di Lorenzo Valla, 441-448; 
Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 103-104; Gerl, Rhetorik als Philosophie, 
235-250. A critical edition of the Oratio is available in: Lorenzo Valla, Orazione per 
linaugurazione dell’anno accademico 1455-1456. Atti di un seminario di filologia umanistica, 
ed. S. Rizzo (Roma: Roma nel Rinascimento, 1994), 192-200. [Camporeale does not actually 
discuss the Oratio in principio sui studii in this essay; instead, he treats the preface to the 
fourth book of Valla’s Elegantiae as a third important parallel text for the Encomium. Eds.] 
68 [Leeman, Orationis ratio (1963), 296.] 


[PDF page 214]
194 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
would have permitted the creation of a new terminology, an original form of 
expression suited to the marriage between classical Latin and Christian cul- 
ture. The mechanical continuity of terms, however, was unbound from the 
morphological and semantic structures of the two languages as well as from 
their respective historical contexts. This entailed — obliquely, as it were — 
the transposition of a verbal-conceptual system, that of Aristotelianism in 
general and metaphysics in particular, into the realm of theology, to whose 
contents (i.e. Christian revelation) it was by its nature semantically unsuited 
if not utterly antithetical. But what happened with the coming of scholasti- 
cism did not occur in early patristic theology. The Fathers, although con- 
noisseurs of classical literature and Greek thought, refused to adopt the 
metaphysical language of Aristotle or to employ its philosophical method- 
ology. On the contrary, Valla insistently stresses, they completely embraced 
the “mode of theologizing’ exemplified in Paul’s Epistles. 
Valla does not limit himself to reminding his contemporaries of the 
prestige and worthiness patristic texts had as foundational sources and 
authorities of the theological tradition; in doing so he would only have 
followed in the footsteps of high scholastic theology. Nor does he intend 
to conduct his apology for ancient theologians against the moderns solely 
by revaluating patristics vis-a-vis scholasticism. He has more in mind than 
defending the former from the criticism of the latter, which charged the 
theological speculation of the first Christian centuries with not having 
attempted a synthesis between revelation and Aristotelian philosophy. 
The originality of Valla’s proposition, and thus of “humanist theology’ 
as an alternative to medieval and contemporary scholasticism, consists in 
something more. Valla effects his recovery of patristics by exalting the 
essential trait of ancient theology — its rhetorical mode, or method (modus 
rhetoricus), which was anti-philosophical and thus a-logical and a-meta- 
physical — and contrasting it directly with Aristotelianism. In this sense, 
patristic theology is considered and adopted not only as a source of tradi- 
tion, but above all and specifically as a methodology. It is the foundational 
guideline for theological study, derived directly from the lone valid model 
of Christian speculation — that of Paul: 
I ... defend the ancients, who are unjustly blamed and abused [by “modern 
theologians” ] for not having theologized according to this method [that is, the 
“method” of the scholastics]. Instead they devoted themselves wholly to imitat- 
ing the apostle Paul, by far the prince of all theologians and the master of 
theologizing.®° 
69 Valla, Encomion, 20.209~212 (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 215]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 195 
For Valla, then, patristic theology constitutes the historical renewal — the 
“imitation” — of the rhetorical method that is characteristic of Paul’s theol- 
ogy and that originates with it. He is the founder, the “prince” and “mas- 
ter,” of the Fathers’ speculation and theological discourse in the first 
centuries of Christianity. 
The apostle Paul is the model of style and method for theological writ- 
ing. He is the greatest rhetorician of Christian culture, just as Demosthenes 
was for classical Greece (according to a parallel formulated by Valla him- 
self in his Adnotationes). Indeed, his “manner of speaking” (modus disse- 
randi) — and Paul was of all the apostles the most “expert at speaking” 
(dicendi peritus) — sublimely embodied the “word of God” that he desired 
to announce to the Hellenistic world. In addition to evangelic preaching, 
the Apostle of the Gentiles also established the specific and distinctive 
methodology of Christian speculation, i.e. the theology of the word (logos- 
sermo), to which every later development in theology thus ought to 
adhere. But whereas the ancient theologians had remained faithful to 
Paul’s speculative principle and rejected even the theoretical possibility of 
a synthesis between theology and philosophy, modern theologians 
behaved in exactly the opposite way. They saw patristic theology, at least 
on the level of method, as an immature phase of Christian thought. 
Valla’s text, which will now be cited, possesses a surprising lucidity. We 
have here the measure and precise meaning of what has been called (but 
inthe pastinaratherrestrictive, ifnot misleading, sense) Valla’s “Paulinism.” 
It is in this Paulinism — in the precise sense just now explained — along 
with the radical Quintilianism of the Dialecticae disputationes (i.e. the 
other methodological axis of his thought) that the uniqueness and origi- 
nality of Lorenzo Valla’s humanist theology lies. 
This [i-e. Paul’s] is the true and, so to speak, the genuine mode of theologiz- 
ing. This is the true law of speaking and writing, and those who pursue it 
doubtless pursue the very best manner of speaking and theologizing. 
Therefore the ancients, the true disciples of Paul, should not be criticized by 
modern theologians or placed second to our Thomas on account of not hav- 
ing mixed theology with philosophy.7° 
70 Tbid., 20.216—-221. For the general context of Valla’s Paulinism and the renewal of 
patristic theology, one should keep in mind Fois’s whole book and particularly the 
passages cited in his index under the entry Padri della Chiesa; but see also the other recent 
studies on Valla, and above all those of Di Napoli and of the present writer, as well as 
Franco Gaeta, Lorenzo Valla. Filologia e storia nell’Umanesimo italiano. (Napoli: Istituto 
italiano per gli studi storici, 1955), with the earlier bibliography indicated there. 


[PDF page 216]
196 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
2.1. Peroration and Closing of the Encomium: Thomas's Systematic 
Philosophy and Theology between the Patristic and Scholastic Traditions 
Let us now move on to the peroration, the closing section of the Encomium. 
Here Valla assembles the panegyric’s various motifs and elements, casting 
them in dimensions and relationships reminiscent of iconography, in 
order to create his own triumph of Thomas. 
In Quintilian, the peroration (peroratio) has two functions: “either to 
refresh the memory or to move the mind.”” That is, it can conclude the 
oration with a recapitulation (for mnemonic purposes), and it can provide 
a concentrated dose of emotive energy (to create a lasting impact on the 
mind of the listener). Moreover, throughout book VI — where Quintilian 
speaks expressly about the peroration — he indicates that it is possible 
either for only one of its functions to be employed (one could, for exam- 
ple, depending on the case at hand, use it simply as a recapitulation) or for 
a summary of the argument to be combined with the persuasive thrust of 
the whole speech. 
In Valla’s case, the rhetorical peroration appears as the conclusion to a 
panegyric whose recapitulation is situated in a hagiographic and liturgical 
context. That is, the objective reference of its elements and dimensions is 
the Church (ecclesia), considered on the one hand historically, i.e. in its 
theological tradition, and on the other hand at the eschatological moment 
of the glorification of the “Lamb of God” in the triumphant vision of the 
Apocalypse. Valla, therefore, makes full use of the double function of 
Quintilian’s peroration. First, it acts as a summary of Thomas’s place in the 
history of the theological tradition of the Christian Church, defining 
Aquinas’s status vis-a-vis the great “ancient”? and “modern” figures of 
Christian thought. Second, it functions as a powerful exhortative and per- 
suasive closing, describing the glorification of Thomas, before the Lamb, 
in the choral presence of the Doctors of the Church. Thus the Encomium 
ends with the vision of the “glory of paradise” in reference to Thomas; with 
the same vision, but in reference to the “just Christian” in general, the 
humanist had concluded the third and final book of De vero falsoque bono. 
But let us take a closer look at this iconographic peroration, which Valla 
arrayed copiously and symmetrically with figures in the manner of early 
fifteenth-century painting. The characteristics or judgments of the indi- 
viduals featured in this literary fresco, which resemble iconographic cap- 
tions (and are often of a traditional or standard nature), take on the status 
7. Quintilian, Institutio oratoria, VII, pr. 1: “aut memoriam refici aut animos moveri.” 


[PDF page 217]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 197 
of historical assessments, especially when they are read in the light of par- 
allel passages from Valla’s oeuvre in which the cultural and theological 
contributions of the same individuals are discussed and critiqued.” 
Aquinas is given a position of privilege (“I place him before”) within the 
monastic tradition of theology and biblical exegesis. He is placed before 
John Cassian (“whom St. Dominic is said to have been in the habit of read- 
ing as if the best doctor’), Anselm (“the sharpest and most refined’), 
Bernard (“a learned, sweet, eloquent, and sublime doctor’), Remigius 
(“the most learned man of his age”), Bede (“more learned than all of 
them”), and Isidore (“whom his admirers deny is second to anyone’). 
Thomas is also preferred to Peter Lombard and Gratian, who “deserve 
more to be called assiduous compilers than true authors.”73 
No differently is Thomas judged within the sphere of high scholasti- 
cism: he is given absolute primacy among modern theologians, both those 
who preceded and those who followed him. Thus the great figures of the 
main mendicant orders are named, from the Dominicans to the 
Franciscans to the Augustinians: Albert the Great, Giles of Rome, 
Alexander of Hales, Bonaventure and Duns Scotus, and still others of the 
same orders, whose members exalt their own theological giants to the 
point of denying their “equivalence” with the “ancients,” who in their 
minds had by then been decisively surpassed. 
Once again, in a third comparison, Aquinas is placed above others on a 
level of superiority, at least from the point of view of the theological tradi- 
tion. Thus he is accorded preeminence over Lactantius and Boethius, 
although only “in theology, for in other areas [i.e. erudition and literary 
culture] there is no comparison.”’"* The same theological primacy is 
granted over Cyprian, as well as over Hilary, Bishop of Poitiers, but with 
qualification: “I add, albeit unwillingly, Hilary as well; for what, finally, is 
holier, more learned, more eloquent than his writings?”’> 
In the triple comparison delineated above, the status of Thomas and his 
theological corpus is determined on the basis of elements that are of indu- 
bitable significance in the Christian cultural tradition. Nevertheless, they 
are not original, essential elements of that literary and theological tradi- 
tion but rather constitute later, secondary developments. The decisive 
72 On this point, see the observations of Fois, I pensiero cristiano di Lorenzo Valla, 
464-467. 
73 Tbid., 21.224—231. 
74 Jbid., 21.235-236. 
7 Jbid., 21.236—238. 


[PDF page 218]
198 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
and defining comparison for determining Aquinas’s importance remains 
that with the great Fathers and Doctors of the Greek and Latin Church. 
It is here that Valla seems to frame the validity and the dimensions, simul- 
taneously historiographical and theoretical, of the perspective within 
which not only Thomas but also the hegemonic development of Thomism 
are to be situated in the ecclesial community. Then again, Valla had already 
stated the premises and announced the terms of this perspective through- 
out the Encomium. Indeed, the entire panegyric revolves around the prob- 
lem of the relationship between scholasticism, with Thomas as its greatest 
representative, and the Fathers, with the ultimate aim of militating for a 
revival of the theological methodology of the “ancient” Doctors of the 
Church — a methodology adopted as an alternative for the radical renewal 
of the “science of divine truths.” This is Valla’s proposal to his contempo- 
raries, trenchantly formulated in the Encomium and submitted on a sol- 
emn occasion to a Christian gathering. It had been constantly elaborated 
across his oeuvre, above all in the Adnotationes, in a continual comparison 
between Thomas’s writings and patristic texts. By comparing Aquinas to 
the Greek and Latin Fathers, Valla was pulling together the threads of his 
extensive study of theology, and thus summarizing his thought in a deci- 
sive climax. 
Valla lists the most eminent Greek and Latin Fathers and symmetrically 
distributes them into two groups of four, which he envisions as four-horse 
teams (quadrigae) drawing the metaphorical chariots of the Western and 
Eastern Church, composed of the foremost Doctors of ancient Christianity: 
the “greatest of all, like a second team of Evangelists.”’® In so doing he 
takes up a traditional theme that recurs in conciliar and magisterial texts, 
in literary and theological writing in general (ancient and medieval, 
monastic and scholastic) and, finally, in sacred and religious iconography. 
But Valla modifies this traditional theme by introducing into it historio- 
graphical and theoretical variations that reassert the distinctively human- 
ist perspective on theology. This emerges from the hierarchical order in 
which the Greek and Latin Fathers are listed, symmetrically compared to 
one another, and situated according to their respective contributions to 
the development and formation of theological thought. The “team” of the 
Latin Fathers, made up of Jerome, Ambrose, Augustine, and Gregory 
[Pope St. Gregory I (“the Great”) ] (in the order assigned them by Valla), is 
presented thus: 
76 Tbid., 22.240—241. 


[PDF page 219]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 199 
I barely know which of them to prefer to whom, as each one had his own 
extraordinary gift. For although Augustine is commonly preferred to all, 
because he treated more theological questions and is in many respects indu- 
bitably to be preferred, nevertheless, if Ambrose’s writings were compared 
with an equal number of Augustine’s, I do not think they would be ranked 
second. Nor does Jerome yield in any way to Augustine’s intellect; he is so 
much the greater in all areas of learning that Augustine seems to me like the 
Mediterranean, Jerome the ocean, upon which few of our contemporaries 
set sail. Gregory lags far behind all in erudition, but he equals them in care- 
fulness and diligence and is possessed of such great sweetness and holiness 
that he seems to speak like an angel.77 
Valla then undertakes an analogous comparison with the greatest Doctors 
of Greek (Eastern) Christianity: 
I would compare them [the Latin Fathers] with the same number of Greeks: 
Ambrose with Basil, whose rival I see he was; Jerome with Gregory 
Nazianzen, whose pupil and disciple he claimed to have been; Augustine 
with John Chrysostom, whom he often followed in his writings and rivaled 
in the number of his books; Gregory with Dionysius the Areopagite, because 
he is the first of the Latins, as far as I know, to mention him (for the works of 
Dionysius were unknown to the others I named, not only the Latins but the 
Greeks as well).”8 
In what relation, then, does Valla see Aquinas’s philosophical and theo- 
logical works (and those of his school) with respect to the patristic thought 
represented by the greatest Greek and Latin Doctors of the Church? 
Turning once again to traditional themes and reasoning, he introduces a 
final pairing: Thomas, the Latin, with John Damascene, the Greek. 
Closest to these comes John Damascene, a most famous author among the 
Greeks, as Thomas is amongst us. It will therefore be perfectly right for John 
and Thomas to be paired together, and all the more so because John wrote 
many logical and well-nigh metaphysical works.’9 
The heavenly choir “before the throne of God and the Lamb,”®° according 
to the celestial vision of the Apocalypse of John (Apoc. 4-5), is now fully 
described. The “five pairs of princes of theology” accompany the twenty- 
four elders of the Apocalypse in their eternal choral praise: “for the writers 
of holy things always make music in the sight of God.”8! And to complete 
77 Jbid., 22.243-252. 
78 [bid., 23.254—261. 
9 Ibid., 23.261-264. 
80 |bid., 24.265-266. 
1 Tbid., 24.266—267. 
x 
@ 


[PDF page 220]
200 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
his fresco of the triumph of Thomas, Valla describes, using medieval and 
Renaissance iconographic references, the orchestral and “hierarchical” 
distribution of musical instruments among the five pairs: the lyre is 
assigned to Basil and Ambrose, the cithara to Gregory Nazianzen and 
Jerome, the psaltery to John Chrysostom and Augustine, the flute to 
Dionysius and Gregory the Great, and the cymbals to John Damascene 
and Thomas. Valla then adds immediately: 
And it will not be unharmonious for their number to be five now instead of 
four — since for musicians there are five tetrachords, not four — nor to have 
Thomas playing the cymbals. For as the name Thomas means ‘twin,’ and as 
he enjoyed playing equally in the twin tones of theology and philosophy, 
thus the cymbals are a double instrument emitting happy, cheerful, and 
pleasing music.®? 
Valla forcefully reaffirms the Encomium’s central thesis of the difference 
between the theology of Aquinas (and scholasticism) and that of the 
Church Fathers. To this end, and in line with Quintilian’s rhetorical pre- 
cepts (Institutio oratoria, bk. I, ch. 10), Valla adorns his speech with norma- 
tive references to music theory and musical instruments. Such references 
were easily accessible to his listeners, who were certainly familiar (having 
learned them in their study of the quadrivium) with the theoretical and 
practical fundamentals of the harmonic relationships (from the octave to 
the tetrachord) of the Greek Pythagorean musical system, as well as with 
the three categories of musical instruments (wind, stringed, and percus- 
sion). Furthermore, reference to works like Boethius’s De institutione 
musica (On Musical Education) (which Valla certainly has in mind, espe- 
cially book I) and Isidore’s De musica (On Music) (cf. book III in particular) 
is implicit in Valla’s discourse. We might also note that the combination of 
polyphonic choir and contrapuntal or supporting instrumentation, to 
which Valla alludes here, echoes the musical (and liturgical) shift brought 
about by the Florentine ars nova. The theoretical and instrumental notions 
of music stressed here, however, are the traditional ones derived from clas- 
sical Greece.83 
82 Tbid., 24.271-276. 
83 Important for this point, and also for what will be said below, are Valla’s glosses on 
Quintilian in ms. Paris, Bibl. Nat., lat. 7723, cited in n. 21 above. In particular, see the annota- 
tions to Institutio oratoria, bk. I, ch. 10, 5-33: ff. 14v-15v, and bk. XII, ch. 10, 68: ff. 150v-1517. 
They give significant information on Valla’s kowledge of music theory and his reading of 
related ancient (Greek and Latin) and medieval texts. Here we confine ourselves to quoting 
the gloss on 1.10.5 (f. 14): “Quintilian associates these arts [sc. music and geometry] with 
the orator better than Plato does with defenders of the fatherland, or Columella with 


[PDF page 221]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 201 
Now what did Valla mean by attributing the melodic function of the 
“fifth tetrachord” to the pair Damascene-Aquinas, and, in his distribution 
of instruments, by assigning the cymbals — the percussion instrument — to 
Thomas? 
The tetrachord, the core from which all Greek music theory developed, 
consisted of four successive sounds descending in a diatonic line and 
composed, therefore, of a series of two tones and a semitone, in an interval 
of a “perfect fourth”: /a, sol, fa, mi. An octave resulted from the duplication 
in ascendant succession (mi, re, do, ti) of the diatonic tetrachord (let us 
confine ourselves here to the Dorian or Hellenic tetrachord, omitting the 
variations in the Lydian and the Phrygian). With the addition, finally, of 
two further tetrachords, one above and one below the octave already 
composed, a series of two octave scales resulted, a melodic whole com- 
posed of four diatonic tetrachords. Thus was constructed the general scale 
of the Greek musical system, known as the “Greater Perfect System.” The 
“fifth tetrachord” of which Valla speaks (with the quite technically precise 
statement, “for musicians there are five tetrachords, not four”) did not 
consist in yet another numerical addition to the general scale of the 
“Perfect System,” but in a modulational variation (the ti natural became ti 
flat in the higher octave) within the numerically unchanged structure of 
the series of four tetrachords. 
Without going further into the technical aspects of the “Perfect 
System” of the Greek musical scale, we can use the few elements described 
here to understand the meaning of Valla’s text. Greek patristic theology, 
farmers, or Vitruvius with architects” (“Melius has artes oratori Quintilianus attribuit 
quam aut Plato propugnatoribus patrie, aut Columella agricolis, aut Vitruvius architectis”). 
Of authors who treated music theory and musical instrumentation, Valla cites and quotes 
the texts of, among others, (ibid., f. 150”) Boethius, De musica, bk. I (PL 63:183-92) and 
Vitruvius, De architectura, bk. V (ch. 4, 6-8). These passages of Boethius and Vitruvius are 
the direct sources for the Encomium’s statement, “for musicians there are five tetrachords, 
not four” (‘apud musicos quinque sunt tetrachorda non quattuor”). Cf. Franco Abbiati, 
Storia della musica, 4 vols. (Milano: Garzanti, 1967-1974), 1:86—93, 151-161, 316-327; Andrew 
Hughes, Music: the Sixth Liberal Art (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1974); Nan Cooke 
Carpenter, Music in the Medieval and Renaissance Universities (Norman: University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1958), chs. 1 and 2; Emanuel Winternitz, “On Angel Concerts in the 15th 
Century: A Critical Approach to Realism and Symbolism in Sacred Painting,” in idem, 
Musical Instruments and their Symbolism in Western Art, New York: W. W. Norton, 1967, 
137-149; idem, “Secular musical practice in sacred art,” Early Music 3 (1975): 221-226; 
Edmund Addison Bowles, “La Hiérarchie des instruments dans I’Europe féodale,” Revue de 
Musicologie 42 (1958): 155-169; D.P. Walker, “Musical Humanism in the 16th and early 17th 
centuries,” Music Review 2 (1941):1-13, 11-121, 220-227, 228-308; 3 (1942): 55—71. I would like 
to thank Profs. Carla Nolledi Martini and William Prizer for these bibliographical 
references. 


[PDF page 222]
202 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
according to Valla, had already achieved the “Perfect System” of theologi- 
cal methodology and speculation. This system was complete in itself and 
had long become a common element of traditional Christian culture. In 
comparison to patristic theology, then, the achievement of scholastic 
theology and its greatest representative, Aquinas (together with John 
Damascene) — i.e., the assumption of classical philosophy within the 
realm of Christian thought and doctrinal language — amounted to nothing 
more than a thematic and formal variation. Valla reiterates this point by 
assigning the cymbals to Thomas and John, a musical instrument com- 
posed of two small discs beaten together, similar to the “twin tones of the- 
ology and philosophy.” For Valla, they resound with the musical whole, 
already complete and perfect in itself, of the four other instruments, one 
wind (the pipe or flute) and three stringed (the psaltery, the cithara, and 
the lyre). 
It is with these theoretical references to music and instruments that 
Valla ends the Encomium, doubtless in imitation of medieval and contem- 
porary iconographic representations of the “glory of paradise.” Let it suf- 
fice to think of the paintings finished only a few years earlier by Beato 
Angelico, during his first and second stays in Rome, on the invitations of 
Nicholas V and Cardinal Juan de Torquemada. And Valla could very well 
have known the works of the Florentine Dominican master, who died in 
Rome in 1455 and was buried in the same temple of Minerva where in 1457 
the humanist declaimed his Encomium. Even if the attribution to Valla of 
the Latin couplets on Beato Angelico’s tomb has still found no confirma- 
tion in any source or document, nevertheless the final lines of the 
Encomium remain fully within the iconographic context of the Dominican 
painter, completing the triumph of Thomas in heavenly glory: 
Such is the tune of Thomas’s books. With this harmony Saint Thomas 
delights both the pious men who read him and the holy angels who now 
hear him. For he is always singing and playing before God with the other 
holy doctors, perpetually either praising the Lamb of God, or entreating Him 
that we mortals may reach the same place he has.®4 
84 Valla, Encomion, 25.277—281. In ms. Rome, Bibl. Angelica, 1500 (see n. 12 above), the 
closing (“... nobis concedat qui vivit et regnat in saecula benedictus. Amen’) is followed by 
this addition (printed in Valla, Oraciones y Prefacios, 321): “Oration of Lorenzo Valla, a most 
learned and eloquent man, which he held in praise of St. Thomas Aquinas in the Church of 
Santa Maria sopra Minerva, in the city of Rome, A.D. 1457, the seventh day of March. He 
died in the same year on the first day of August” (“Doctissimi viri ac eloquentissimi 
Laurentii e Valle Oratio, quam habuit in laudem Sancti Thomae Aquinatis in Ecclesia 
Sanctae Mariae Minervae, in urbe romana A.D. 1457, VII die Martii, obiitque eodem anno 
die primo Augusti”). 


[PDF page 223]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 203 
3. THE APORIAS OF SCHOLASTICISM 
31. Philosophy/Theology 
“The mode employed in treating the Trinity is twofold, ... namely, 
through truths known on the basis of authority and through those 
known by reason .... Some of the holy Fathers ... employed but 
one mode of explanation: namely, by setting forth those truths 
founded upon authority. But Boethius chose to proceed according 
to the other mode: namely, according to reasoned arguments.” 
— Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on 
Boethius’s De trinitate, prologue®> 
“Boethius, for no other reason than that he loved philosophy 
excessively, argued incorrectly about free will in the fifth book of 
his Consolation of Philosophy.” 
— Lorenzo Valla, De libero arbitrio, preface®® 
The Encomium of 1457 will have found its proper historical and theoretical 
place if it is understood as the organic summary and the definitive state- 
ment of Valla’s critique of scholasticism. Indeed, it contains the two essen- 
tial features of that critique: the rejection of the fundamental premise of 
scholasticism, which had informed the renewal of Thomism in the second 
half ofthe fifteenth century; and the proposal ofan alternative to Thomism, 
a humanist principle for the epistemic refounding of theology. Within the 
cultural and historiographical space of Valla’s oration, these two features 
have theoretical and normative value. On the one hand, the Encomium 
identifies the epistemic principle underlying the restoration of Thomism: 
“that no one can become a theologian without the teachings of the dialec- 
ticians, metaphysicians, and the other philosophers.” On the other hand, 
it reproposes the “mode of theologizing” that had been fully elaborated by 
Greek and Latin patristics and that was derived from the apostle Paul, the 
normative model for Christian speculation. 
Since these appear to be the two poles between which the Encomium 
runs, it would seem worthwhile to deepen the analysis of them beyond 
85 Thomas Aquinas, Expositio super librum Boethii de Trinitate: “Modus de Trinitate 
tractandi duplex est, ... sc. per auctoritates et per rationes .... Quidam vero sanctorum 
Patrum ... alterum tantum modum prosecuti sunt, sc. per auctoritates. Boethius vero elegit 
prosequi per alium modum, scilicet per rationes’ (tr. Brennan, as cited below in n. 100). 
86 Valla, De libero arbitrio, 526: “Boethius nulla alia causa, nisi quod nimis philosophiae 
amator fuit, non eo modo quo debuit, disputavit de libero arbitrio in Vlibro De Consolatione” 
(tr. Trinkaus, modified, as cited below in n. 87). 


[PDF page 224]
204 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
what was said in the first part of the present essay. Comparing the 
Encomium with certain parallel and otherwise essential texts of Valla’s 
corpus will aid in understanding its deeper significance, as well as in situ- 
ating its most original aspects within the context of the most important 
moments and phases in Valla’s intellectual development. We shall confine 
ourselves to carefully chosen parallel passages, namely the opening pages 
of De libero arbitrio, chapter 12 of book III of De vero falsoque bono, and the 
preface to book IV of the Elegantiae.8” 
3.1.1. Boethius as the Starting Point for Scholasticism and Valla’s Anti- 
Boethian Critique: The “Christian Religion” and the “Protection of 
Philosophy” 
Valla consistently identifies Boethius with the starting point of scholasti- 
cism (increasingly so, and with greater significance, with each subsequent 
redaction of the Dialecticae disputationes). It is in Boethius, he affirms 
repeatedly and variously, that the essential epistemological dimension of 
scholasticism — the use of classical philosophy for theological study — 
emerges for the first time, immediately rife with consequences for the 
Latin culture of the West and already charged with its full historical and 
theoretical significance. And it is in this context, as far as Valla is con- 
cerned, that The Consolation of Philosophy — throughout the Middle Ages 
a renowned pedagogical and scholastic literary text — takes on emblem- 
atic meaning, with respect both to its contents and to its methodology. 
87 These texts are available in the following editions: De libero arbitrio, in Prosatori latini 
del Quattrocento, Latin text and Italian translation, ed. Eugenio Garin (Milano: R. Ricciardi, 
1952), 523-565; De vero falsoque bono, ed. Maristella De Panizza Lorch (Bari: Adriatica, 
1970), 11-113; Elegantiae, Book IV, Preface in Garin (ed.), Prosatori latini, 612-622, and in 
Valla, Oraciones y Prefacios, 228-246, with Latin text and Spanish translation. [An English 
translation of De libero arbitrio by Charles Trinkaus, which has been used here, appears in 
The Renaissance Philosophy of Man, eds. Ernst Cassirer, Paul Oskar Kristeller, and John 
Herman Randall (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948), 155-182. De vero falsoque 
bono has also been translated into English: Lorenzo Valla, On Pleasure, De voluptate, tr. Kent 
Hieatt and Maristella Lorch (New York: Abaris Books, 1977).] An Italian translation of De 
libero arbitrio and De vero falsoque bono is available in Valla, Scritti filosofici, 253-282, and 
3ff. (ch. 12, bk. II is found on 202-205). For the text of the preface to bk. IV of the Elegantiae, 
the following mss. (sec. XV) have also been consulted: Florence, Bibl. Laur., Conv. soppr. 187 
(ff. 58y-6or); Vatican City, Bibl. Apost. Vat., Pal. lat. 1759 (ff. 89v-g2r). See Jozef Ijsewijn and 
Gilbert Tournoy, “Un primo censimento dei manoscritti e delle edizioni a stampa degli 
Elegantiarum linguae latinae libri sex di Lorenzo Valla,” Humanistica Lovaniensia 18 (1969): 
25-41; idem, “Nuovi contributi per I’elenco dei manoscritti e delle edizioni a stampa delle 
Elegantiae di Lorenzo Valla,” Humanistica Lovaniensia 20 (1971): 1-3; [and Francesco Lo 
Monaco and Mariangela Regoliosi, “I manoscritti con opere autentiche di Lorenzo Valla,” 
in Pubblicare il Valla, ed. M. Regoliosi (Firenze: Polistampa, 2008), 67-97, at 94]. 


[PDF page 225]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 205 
For in this work Valla sees the functional use of philosophy as actually 
displacing theological discourse proper, and this with regard to a singular 
and deeply significant issue: the problem of the praxis and freedom of a 
Christian. 
Hence the fact that Valla’s (very) first attack on philosophy takes the 
form of a critical examination of the Consolation. De voluptate (like the 
successive redactions that will converge in De vero falsoque bono) and De 
libero arbitrio are directed against the series of arguments that underlies 
Boethius’s text. Valla himself says as much, openly and programmatically, 
in the opening pages of De libero arbitrio: 
Here we want to show that Boethius, for no other reason than that he loved 
philosophy excessively (nimis philosophiae amator), argued incorrectly 
about free will in the fifth book of his Consolation of Philosophy. We have 
replied to the first four books in our De vero bono. Now I shall exert myself as 
far as possible in the discussion and solution of this problem, and, so that it 
will not seem purposeless after so many other writers have held forth on this 
subject, I shall add something of my own.88 
It would go beyond the boundaries of the present study to consider the 
multiple aspects of Valla’s critique of Boethius, which, it should be noted, 
was an original and defining aspect of the humanist’s polemic against 
scholasticism and Aristotelianism.°9 Here our object is rather to clarify 
the terms and implications of Valla’s critique of Boethius as a critique of 
philosophy, undertaken in the service of a humanist alternative to the the- 
ology of medieval and Renaissance scholasticism. 
In De libero arbitrio, Valla defines the fundamental premise of scholasti- 
cism that will be the focus of his examination and critique of philosophy. 
In fact, the definition that he gives of that premise has close textual paral- 
lels with what he will say in the Encomium of 1457. In De libero arbitrio, 
when treating human freedom and divine predestination, his goal is to 
demonstrate the falsity of scholastic theology’s methodological assump- 
tion “that no one can become a theologian unless he knows the precepts 
of philosophy and has learned them most diligently and thoroughly,” and 
thus to refute the position “that those of former times who either did not 
88 Valla, De libero arbitrio, 526: “In praesentiarum vero ostendere volumus Boethium 
nulla alia causa, nisi quod nimis philosophiae amator fuit, non eo modo quo debuit dis- 
putasse de libero arbitrio in quinto libro De consolatione. Nam primis quattuor libris 
respondimus in opere nostro De vero bono; atque hanc omnem materiam quam diligentis- 
sime potero discutere et resolvere conabor, ut de ea non frustra post omnes ego scriptores 
videar disseruisse: aliquid enim de nostro ac praeter ceteros afferemus’ (tr. Trinkaus). 
89 Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 142-145 and passim. 


[PDF page 226]
206 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
know or did not want to know them [the teachings of philosophy] were 
stupid.”9° Roman law, Valla continues, prohibited the speaking of foreign 
languages (lingua peregrina) in senatorial assemblies, even in the official 
reception of embassies, and stipulated that only the language of Rome 
(vernacula Urbis) could be used. Scholastic theologians, in violation of the 
laws of the evangelical church (ecclesia), introduced the language of 
paganism (sermo gentilis) into the community of believers (respublica 
christiana). 
By attacking what has been called the methodological premise of scho- 
lastic theology in this way, Valla’s critique actually rejected an entire tradi- 
tion of theological thought. Although that tradition achieved its greatest 
and most comprehensive systematization in Thomas Aquinas, it had its 
origins in Augustine, who employed it not only for basic apologetic pur- 
poses but also, in a methodologically more sophisticated form, in his De 
doctrina christiana (On Christian Doctrine). It is no accident that Valla’s 
critique of Boethius’s theology also involves Augustine and Thomas and 
groups them all into the same historical perspective, both in De libero arbi- 
trio and, especially and quite explicitly, in the Adnotationes.* 
For Valla, the “Christian religion” (christiana religio) — unlike the theo- 
logical tradition that converged in scholasticism, from Boethius to Abelard 
and then to Thomas and Thomism — has no need of the “protection of 
philosophy” (praesidium philosophiae). It is therefore necessary to con- 
demn scholasticism absolutely, for it is a systematic theology contrary to 
the preaching of the Apostles and thus to the normative model of theo- 
logical study. The Apostles, although (or perhaps because) they were 
“ignorant and weaponless,” preached the Gospel so effectively that “they 
reduced so much of the world to their authority.” Hence the fact — Valla 
says with the Church Fathers in mind — that men emerged at the origins of 
Christianity’s theological tradition who were “truly pillars in the temple of 
God” and whose writings “have now been extant many centuries.” The 
Fathers are at the head of the whole ecclesial community precisely 
because they were in every way “imitators of the Apostles.” These men, 
who were the first to proceed into theological study, took the “imitation” of 
apostolic preaching, in contradistinction to “philosophical doctrines,” as a 
premise and a methodological principle for that study. For they were 
9° Valla, De libero arbitrio, 524: “neminem posse theologum evadere nisi qui praecepta 
philosophiae teneat eaque diligentissime perdidicerit, stultosque eos ... qui antehac vel 
nescierunt haec vel nescire voluerunt” (tr. Trinkaus, modified). 
91 See, e.g., Valla, Opera omnia, 1:808a: Adnotationes in Matthew 4:10. 


[PDF page 227]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 207 
convinced that “not only does philosophy not aid the holiest religion, but 
she also does it great violence.” 
That the Greek and Latin Fathers’ prejudice against philosophy was 
fully justified, Valla argues (again in the opening pages of De libero arbi- 
trio), is clear from the fact that “heresies,” beginning in the first centuries 
of Christianity, had their “origins” in “philosophy.” This is the exact oppo- 
site of what scholastic theologians think: 
But they of whom I speak consider [philosophy] a tool for weeding out her- 
esies, when actually it is a seedbed of heresy. They do not realize that the 
most pious antiquity, which lacked the arm of philosophy in combating her- 
esies, and which often fought bitterly against philosophy itself — driving it 
forth like Tarquin into exile, never to allow its return — is thus accused of 
ignorance.”93 
Scholasticism, on the contrary, rejected this inheritance handed down 
from the Fathers. It refused to recognize in it any “authority,” preferring 
“to enter upon a new path’ and behaving like a sailor who “prefers to hold 
> «eo 
an uncharted course.”*4 The ancients’ “imitation of the Apostles” was as if 
turned on its head by the modern theologians of scholasticism, in their 
constant, enormous effort to pursue the study of all dogmatic philosophy. 
3.1.2. The Insoluble Antinomy between God’s Omnipotence/Absolute 
Foreknowledge and Human Freedom/Predestination: The Polemic against 
Boethius from Peter Damian to Lorenzo Valla 
These are the terms in which Valla formulates his critique of philosophy in 
the opening pages of De libero arbitrio. This critique had already been 
92 Valla, De libero arbitrio, 524: “Male enim sentire mihi videntur de nostra religione, 
quam putant philosophiae praesidio indigere; quod minime illi fecerunt quorum iam mul- 
tis saeculis opera exstant, apostolorum imitatores et vere in templo Dei columnae. Ac qui- 
dem, si probe animadvertamus, quidquid illis temporibus haeresum fuit, quas non parum 
multas fuisse accepimus, id omne fere ex philosophicorum dogmatum fontibus nasceba- 
tur, un non modo non prodesset philosophia sanctissimae religioni, sed etiam vehementis- 
sime obesset .... Itane imperiti fuerunt illi et inermes? Et quomodo tantum orbis terrarum 
in ditionem suam redegerunt?” (tr. Trinkaus, modified). 
93 Tbid., 524: “eam [sc. philosophiam] isti, de quibus loquor, natam esse ad extirpandas 
haereses iactant, quarum potius seminarium est, nec intelligunt se imperitiae accusare 
piissimam antiquitatem, quae in expugnandis haeresibus philosophiae arma non habuit, 
et saepe contra ipsam philosophiam depugnavit acerrime et tamquam Tarquinium in 
exilium eiecit, neque redire passa est” (tr. Trinkaus). 
94 Jbid., 524: “Si minus ratio, certe auctoritas illorum effectusque inducere debuit, ut se 
imitaremini potius quam novam viam ingrederemini .... Et nautam qui mavult insuetum 
iter tenere, quam id per quod ceteri salva navi ac mercibus navigarunt” (tr. Trinkaus, 
modified). 


[PDF page 228]
208 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
developed more elaborately and at greater length in the Disputationes and 
in De vero falsoque bono. But in De libero arbitrio Valla reproposes it as the 
premise to a theme that, for the traditional opposition to philosophy, had 
been standard in — indeed was the age-old argument underlying — the 
final and irrefutable proof demonstrating the radical incompossibility 
between philosophy and theology: the insoluble antinomy between God’s 
omnipotence and absolute foreknowledge, on the one hand, and human 
freedom and predestination, on the other. 
As Jean Isaac has demonstrated, it was the wide and penetrating diffu- 
sion of Boethius’s translation and interpretation of Aristotle’s On 
Interpretation (Peri hermeneias) that brought the problematic of philoso- 
phy/theology to the fore in all its theoretical and historical dimensions, 
and precisely with regard to the aporia surrounding the relationship 
between human freedom/predestination and saving grace.%° The his- 
torico-cultural controversy over classical philosophy’s functionality in, or 
incompossibility with, theology perhaps ought to be traced (in early scho- 
lasticism) to Peter Damian’s reaction against philosophy in the first 
decades of the eleventh century. Emblematic of the problem, in his mind, 
was the attempt to resolve the antinomy between free will and predesti- 
nation by means of Aristotelian logic, and precisely with chapter 9 of On 
Interpretation, which discusses modal propositions and the contrary pairs 
“possible/impossible” and “necessary/contingent.” 
The proof that that antinomy could not be circumscribed, much less 
resolved, within Aristotle’s propositional analysis and logical categories 
was the best evidence against any compatibility whatsoever between phi- 
losophy and theology, even in the sense of an analogical functionality of 
the former within the latter. Boethius’s attempt in his (second) commen- 
tary to On Interpretation and his reading of chapter 9 in relation to the 
problem of divine foreknowledge and human freedom thus had to be con- 
sidered a failure. What is more, according to Peter Damian it was neces- 
sary to radically reverse the perspective clearly delineated in Boethius’s 
procedure: his use, that is, of logical, metaphysical, and grammatical cat- 
egories at every level of theological study. Damian’s reaction against phi- 
losophy consequently entailed a wholesale rejection of an even partial 
accommodation of Christian thought to Greek culture: from logic to meta- 
physics, and from grammar to rhetoric. The irreducibility of the Christian 
95 Jean Isaac, Le Peri hermeneias en Occident de Boéce a saint Thomas. Histoire litteraire 
d'un traité dAristote (Paris: Vrin, 1953), 44-49. 


[PDF page 229]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 209 
“mystery” to classical thought was not only conceptual and semantic; it 
also undermined categories and procedures, such as rhetorical discourse, 
on a meta-linguistic level: 
Notice, therefore, how the blind foolhardiness of these pseudo-intellectuals 
who investigate non-problems, by boldly attributing to God those things 
that refer to the art of rhetoric .... These men, indeed, because they have not 
yet learned the elements of style, lose their grasp of the fundamentals of 
simple faith as a result of the obscurity produced by their dull tricks; and, 
still ignorant of those things boys study in school, they heap the abuse of 
their contentious spirit on the mysteries of God. Moreover, because they 
have acquired so little skill in the rudiments of learning or of the liberal arts, 
they obscure the study of pure ecclesiastical doctrine by the cloud of their 
curiosity. Clearly, conclusions drawn from the arguments of dialecticians and 
rhetoricians should not be thoughtlessly addressed to the mysteries of divine 
power.96 
Thus wrote Peter Damian, the “bitterest enemy of the liberal arts in the 
history of medieval theology,” in his De divina omnipotentia (On Divine 
Omnipotence), in direct opposition to Boethius and _ scholasticism. 
Nevertheless, and “by a wonderful irony of fate,” as Isaac says, it was pre- 
cisely as a result of this attack against the theological use of chapter 9 of 
On Interpretation that this renowned passage of Aristotle on modal logic 
and future contingents would become an essential source for the philo- 
sophical and theological treatment of and solution to the question of free 
will and predestination.%” In his De concordia praescientiae et praedestina- 
tionis et gratiae Dei cum libero arbitrio (On the Concord of Foreknowledge, 
Predestination, and God’s Grace with Free Will), Anselm of Canterbury, 
one of the greatest figures in scholasticism’s formative period, used the 
same passage of Aristotle, but in a positive way, to open the way for philo- 
sophico-theological argumentation of a kind diametrically opposed to 
that of Peter Damian. And it is precisely this issue that would become 
96 Peter Damian, On Divine Omnipotence, in Peter Damian: Letters 91-120, tr. Owen J. 
Blum (Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 1998), 356: “Videat ergo 
imperitia sapientium et vana quaerentium caeca temeritas, quasi haec, quae ad artem per- 
tinent disserendi, ad Deum procaciter referant .... Qui nimirum, quia necdum didicerunt 
elementa verborum, per obscuras argumentorum suorum caligines amittunt clarae fidei 
fundamentum, et, ignorantes adhuc quod a pueris tractatur in scholis, querelae suae 
calumnias divinis ingerunt sacramentis! Et, quia inter rudimenta discentium, vel artis 
humanae, nullam apprehendere periciam, curiositatis suae nubilo perturbant puritatis 
ecclesiasticae disciplinam! Haec, plane, quae ex dialecticorum vel rhetorum prodeunt argu- 
mentis, non facile divinae virtutis sunt aptanda mysteriis” (emphasis added). 
97 [Isaac, Le Peri Hermeneias, 47: “par une charmante ironie du sort, entre sous la plume 
de ’'ennemi le plus virulent des artes libéraux dans histoire de la théologie médiévale.” ] 


[PDF page 230]
210 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
emblematic and extremely significant for reasserting Aristotelian philoso- 
phy’s function, especially in its logical and ontological categories, as the 
handmaiden to theological investigation. 
Thus Valla took up Peter Damian’s radical critique of philosophy, but 
he placed it within the specific viewpoint of early humanism. The opposi- 
tion to the introduction of philosophy into theology had continued, as is 
well known, beyond Peter Damian. An entire cultural current of medieval 
theology constantly maintained a contrary and antithetical stance to the 
Boethian origins of scholasticism, from Bernard to the Victorines to 
the Masters of theology at the University of Paris in the first decades of the 
thirteenth century. Two of these Masters were Jean de Saint-Gilles 
(the first to hold the second chair of the Dominicans), who polemicized 
against the “barbarization’” of “theological language” through Aristotelian 
“metaphysics,” and Odo of Chateauroux (chancellor of the church of 
Paris), who rebuked theologians who “sell themselves to the sons of the 
Greeks, that is to the philosophers.”?° 
And yet, to understand the full import and the true sense of this com- 
parison between the various anti-Boethian stances, which span from the 
eleventh century to the thirteenth (but that continue thereafter as well), 
and the introductory pages to De libero arbitrio, it must be added immedi- 
ately that Valla profoundly modified Peter Damian’s critique of philoso- 
phy. Valla rejected any and every union of theology with philosophy, but 
he did so within a perspective inverse to that of the Bishop of Ravenna. 
For his rejection had a different aim, namely that of formulating a new 
principle of theology: the use of rhetoric, as described in Quintilian’s 
Institutio, as a new instrument of philological and categorical criticism, 
both for the study of scripture and for theological argumentation. Thus 
Valla’s polemic inhabited a specific and unique historico-cultural context. 
On the one hand, it stood in antithesis to the neo-Thomism of his time. It 
was the critique of a theological methodology that Valla judged unsuitable 
to the new exigencies arising from contemporary Christian praxis and 
from the shift taking place in the first half of the fifteenth century. On the 
other hand, it stood in opposition to Boethius’s theological Aristotelianism, 
which had reached its culmination in Thomas and in the special role he 
had given to philosophy, namely that of handmaiden to theology.2 
8 [For the full quotations, see pp. 229-230 below. | 
99 Pierre Mandonnet, Siger de Brabant et lAverroisme latin au XIllme siécle, 2 vols. 
(Louvain: Institut supérieur de philosophie de l'Université), 1908-191, 11-63; but see also 


[PDF page 231]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 211 
3.1.3. A Comparative Reading of Valla’s Texts with Thomas’s Commentary 
on Boethius’s De Trinitate 
The Summa theologiae, which the Thomist restoration of the fifteenth 
century held up as a normative model for theological study, was for Valla’s 
contemporaries (as well as for others) the most significant work in 
Aquinas’s literary corpus. For the Summa embodied the perfect form, and 
was in a certain sense the fullest and most mature expression, of philoso- 
phy’s role as handmaiden to theology in the tradition of medieval scholas- 
ticism. But there is another work, in the same scholastic tradition, in 
which Thomas systematically and quite incisively identified the prole- 
gomena to the epistemological principle of his own theological study. In 
the Commentary on Boethius’s De Trinitate (Expositio super librum Boethii 
De Trinitate, 1255-59), Aquinas had explained the theoretical foundations 
of his own Wissenschaftslehre, not only in its historico-cultural and specu- 
lative aspects but also from an apologetic standpoint. In direct and imme- 
diate reference to contemporary methodological debates, he posited the 
necessity of — and gave the criteria for — systematically using the rhetorical 
and philosophical disciplines (as elaborated in Aristotelianism) for theo- 
logical argumentation. 
Considering this, let us undertake a comparison between Valla’s anti- 
philosophical texts and the third article of Question II of Aquinas’s 
Commentary on Boethius. This comparison will bring into relief the full 
meaning of the historical dimension separating the humanist from the 
great scholastic, showing them to be two poles marking the different 
directions taken in a double shift in the history of theology. It will also 
reveal the full historico-cultural significance of the critique of scholasti- 
cism contained in Valla’s Encomium, whose aim was the radical renewal of 
theology in the face of the investigative methodology of Thomism — a 
methodology that in its founder had been richly endowed with cognitive 
possibilities and original ideas but that, in the fifteenth century, was being 
reproposed as the restoration of a fully perfected and delineated system. 
A comparative reading of Thomas's text with Valla’s oration is of great 
interest: for although the same patristic references and the same problem- 
atic (the relationship between Christianity and Greco-Hellenistic culture) 
recur, Thomas and Valla reach contrary solutions. Even more so, though, 
reading Thomas in light of Valla is surprising, on account of how acutely 
Marie-Dominique Chenu, La Théologie comme science au XIllme siécle (Paris: Vrin, 1943), 
25-32. 


[PDF page 232]
212 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Valla yet again identifies moments of cultural rupture and assaults the 
theoretical foundations of his contemporaries (in this specific case, the 
neo-Thomists of the fifteenth century). He achieves this complex opera- 
tion by working on two levels. On one, he revaluates Thomas’s work per se 
in an historiographic retrospective. On the other, he illustrates its unique 
character, thus showing that its revival under wholly different circum- 
stances is not valid. To Valla’s mind, Thomas’s thought was organically 
related to the historical circumstances of the thirteenth century. Lacking 
new investigatory tools, it was unsuitable for resolving new problematics. 
In this sense, the cultural break on which Valla insists appears as the clear 
reversal of the theoretical arguments underlying the restoration of 
Thomism in the fifteenth century. 
3.1.4. The Epistemological Correlation between Philosophy and Theology in 
Question II, Article 3 of the Commentary on Boethius, and the References 
to Jerome’s Letters to Eustochium, to the Orator Magnus, and to 
Pammachius 
Question II of the Commentary on Boethius is entirely devoted to the 
theme of the epistemological relationship between philosophy and theol- 
ogy.1°° In Aquinas’s terminology (as announced in the Question’s very 
title), the problem concerns the possibility of, and the analytical and argu- 
mentative instruments proper to, the “manifestation of divine knowledge” 
(manifestatio divinae cognitionis). Article 3 constitutes the problematic 
nucleus as well as the resolution of Thomas’s treatment. Since he desired 
to demonstrate the reducibility of the “knowledge of divine truths” (cogni- 
tio divinorum) to a “science” (scientia), i.e. to demonstrate the very possi- 
bility of theology, he had to describe its method both on a formal level of 
investigation and language (Article 1: “treating divine truths ... by means 
of inquiry”; Article 4: “concealing divine truths ... by new and obscure 
words”)!°! and on the plane of its specific contents (Article 2: “the exis- 
tence of a science of divine truths”; Article 3: “whether in the science of 
100 For the text, we follow the critical edition: Thomas Aquinas, Expositio super librum 
Boethii de Trinitate, ed. Bruno Decker (Leiden: Brill, 1965). For the dating of the work, cf. 
ibid., p. 44. [English translations are based on those of Rose Emmanuella Brennan in 
Thomas Aquinas, The Trinity and the Unicity of the Intellect, tr. R.E. Brennan (St. Louis: 
B. Herder, 1946), from the on-line text (accessed 03.09.2013): http://dhspriory.org/thomas/ 
BoethiusDeTr.htm#23. | 
101 Aquinas, Expositio super librum Boethii de Trinitate, quae. II, art. 1: “divina ... 
investigando tractare”; art. 4: “divina ... velanda novis et obscuris verbis” (tr. Brennan, 
modified). 


[PDF page 233]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 213 
faith, which is concerning God, it is permissible to use the arguments of 
the ... philosophers”).!02 
The essential elements of the sic et non problematic regarding whether 
there was a radical dichotomy between philosophy and theology or rather 
a possibility of union had already been theoretically formulated and his- 
torically defined before Aquinas. Indeed, they emerged over centuries of 
Christian thought and had become attached to a standard set of scriptural 
and patristic references as obligatory as they were familiar. It is as such, i.e. 
as premises to subsequent solutions, that these scriptural and patristic 
texts are taken up by Thomas and dutifully listed and annotated. 
Indispensable references in favor of a radical dichotomy - see the series of 
objections in Article 3 — were to Paul (1 Cor. 1:7) and Jerome (Letter to 
Eustochium), along with formulations based on the antinomy between 
secular and divine wisdom (sapientia saecularis/sapientia divina). On the 
opposite side (in the sed contra section), in support of the possibility of 
union, the obligatory references were to other letters of Jerome (Letter to 
the Orator Magnus, Letter to Pammachius), to Augustine’s “discourse on 
theological method,” found in his De doctrina christiana, and to the same 
author’s scientific deployment of theological speculation, in his De 
Trinitate (On the Trinity). 
Let us take a closer look at the arguments found in Article 3, first those 
in objection and then the respective responses in the sed contra. Thereafter 
an interpretive and contextual reading of the third article will be pro- 
posed, and finally a few observations will be put forth regarding the coun- 
ter-arguments that conclude Aquinas’s text. 
The reasons adduced for rejecting a possible union between philoso- 
phy and theology had been derived from the kerygmatic praxis of the 
Apostle of the Gentiles, particularly from texts like 1 Corinthians 1:17 (and 
parallel passages). Paul’s statements — directly related to the failure of his 
speech at the Areopagus — were interpreted as an urgent admonition that 
the Gospel could not be circumscribed within the dimensions of the 
“wisdom of the word” (sapientia verbi): Christian logos could neither be 
subsumed nor constrained within the linguistic and semantic structures 
of the Greek logos. And the interpretive Gloss — dutifully attached by 
Aquinas in support and confirmation of the objector — translated Paul’s 
102 Jbid., quae. IJ, art. 2: “de divinis ... esse aliqua scientia’; art. 3: “utrum in scientia fidei, 
quae est de Deo, liceat rationibus philosophicis ... uti” (tr. Brennan, modified). 


[PDF page 234]
214 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
formulation “wisdom of the word” as “learning of the philosophers” 
(doctrina philosophorum). 
This constant of Christian culture came to be corroborated by the 
patristic reference to Jerome’s Letter to Eustochium.!°? For the dream of 
Jerome that it describes, which condemned the Latin “wisdom of the 
word” as incarnated in Ciceronian rhetoric, had taken on emblematic sig- 
nificance. The conflict in the Christian conscience driven by the opposi- 
tion between the Gospel and classical Greco-Roman culture emerged in 
Jerome and in his works, taking the form of a profound disturbance that, 
despite the scope and development of contemporary patristic literature, 
could be dismissed but not resolved. The pseudo-ideological compromise 
between “divine wisdom’ and “secular wisdom’ (the sophia tou kosmou of 
the Greeks mentioned by Paul in 1 Cor. 1:20) resembled the discount sale 
of adulterated wine — thus the ironic argument of another objection, 
whose source can be traced to the anti-Thomist critique of Bonaventure’s 
Hexaemeron. No different are barkeeps (caupones) who secretly mix and 
degrade “fine wine with water,” to whom the prophet Isaiah (1:22) com- 
pared Jerusalem, the once “faithful and righteous city” that had become a 
“harlot” for betraying the Ancient Alliance with Yahweh. In plain lan- 
guage: if the canons prohibited reading in the books of the Gentiles in 
order to ensure the purity of “Theo-logy” as the “Word of God” and to 
secure the theologian’s faith to that Word, all the more so did the study of 
these books have to be prohibited, lest their contents be transferred to the 
investigation of divine truths. 
In the sed contra, on the other hand, we find the scriptural and patristic 
references that substantiate the possibility of a synthesis between philos- 
ophy and theology. The arguments adduced here are aimed against the 
supporters of a theological fundamentalism that rejected classical culture 
and posited the absolute autonomy of the Judeo-Christian tradition. They 
are admittedly of an ad hominem nature, but they gain objective validity 
by the fact that they are drawn from other passages of Jerome’s own let- 
ters. In particular, reference is made to the Letter to Magnus and to the 
Letter to Pammachius.!* In the Letter to Magnus, Jerome recalled how the 
apostle Paul, although warning the Christians of Corinth about the abso- 
lute antithesis between the “folly of the Cross” and “secular wisdom,” did 
not intend therewith to condemn Greek culture. Like all orators of his age, 
103 Jerome, Epistola ad Eustochium (ep. 22) in PL 22:394-425,. 
104 Jerome, Epistola ad Magnum oratorem (ep. 70), in PL 22:664-68; idem, Epistola ad 
Pammachium (ep. 66), in PL 22:639—47. 


[PDF page 235]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 215 
the Apostle, too, often made use of Greek poetry in his preaching 
(Epimenides in Tit. 1:22; Menander in 1 Cor. 15:22; Aratus in Acts 17:28). 
What is more, in the same letter Jerome reviewed the major representa- 
tives of (Greek and Latin) Christian culture from the first centuries of the 
Church, including his own contemporaries, to emphasize the universal 
and explicit use of ancient philosophy and rhetoric on the part of the 
Fathers and doctors of Christianity. Cyprian and Origen, Clement of 
Alexandria and Gregory Nazianzen — as Jerome says — 
fill their books so full with the teachings and judgments of the philosophers 
that you would not know what is more amazing, their secular erudition or 
their knowledge of the Scriptures.!°5 
There was an uninterrupted tradition of using Greek and Latin culture for 
Christian apologetics and theology, constantly pursued even by those 
closest in time to Jerome’s cultural context. Thus, with a view to their liter- 
ary style, Jerome characterizes Lactantius as “Ciceronian” and Hilary of 
Poitiers as “Quintilianesque.” To those who took a stand against pagan 
culture, Jerome was therefore able to respond in defense of his own works: 
What is so amazing if I, too, desire to turn secular wisdom, on account of the 
charm of its eloquence and the beauty of its aspect, from a slave and pris- 
oner into an Israelite?!°® 
Here Jerome makes metaphorical use of the precept found in Deuteronomy 
(21:10-14) regarding the “beautiful prisoner,” the woman captured in war 
and made a bride, but only after having been stripped of her “foreign orna- 
ments” and returned, “liberating her,” to Israelite beauty. Jerome’s inter- 
pretation of this scriptural passage would become a classic of Latin 
ecclesiastical literature, a slogan in defense of the re-appropriation of 
Greco-Hellenistic wisdom on the part of a Christianity that reigns victori- 
ous over the pagan world. In practice, however, this re-appropriation 
would take many various forms, assuming modalities often opposed to 
one another and covering the most variegated positions. Even a thinker 
like Peter Damian would believe that he respected the validity of Jerome’s 
criterion for cultural mediation within Christianity. In any case, the Letter 
to Magnus and other parallel texts of Jerome (like his Letter to Pammachius, 
105 Jerome, Epistola ad Magnum oratorem, 667-668: “in tantum philosophorum doctri- 
nis atque sententiis suos resarciunt libros, ut nescias quid in illis primum admirari debeas, 
eruditionem saeculi an scientiam Scripturarum.” 
106 Jbid., 666: “quid ergo mirum, si et ego sapientiam saecularem propter eloquii venus- 
tatem et membrorum pulchritudinem, de ancilla atque captiva Israelitidem facere cupio?” 


[PDF page 236]
216 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
where once again the adoption of “secular wisdom” in the sphere of 
“divine wisdom’ is considered a liberation of the “prisoner woman,” such 
that “from a Moabite she will be made an Israelite”!’), would be con- 
stantly utilized to defend the compatibility between philosophy and 
theology. 
3.1.5. Thomas's Reference to Book II, Chapter 40 of Augustine’s De doctrina 
christiana in the sed contra and the Corpus of Article 3 of the Commentary 
on Boethius 
Comparing Jerome and Augustine on the problem of the epistemological 
mediation between philosophy and theology was de rigueur, especially 
considering the diversity of their respective approaches. Hence Aquinas’s 
reference, in the sed contra and in the corpus of Article 3, to Augustine’s 
De Trinitate (On the Trinity) and De doctrina christiana. De Trinitate was a 
unique and emblematic model for the mediation between “divine” and 
“secular wisdom.” It treated the theme fully in order to provide a founda- 
tion for a Trinitarian theology that would remain — and this is how it was 
always seen in the Latin tradition — a highly original and significant work 
of theoretical inquiry in the Christian West. But let us pass over Aquinas’s 
reference to Augustine’s De Trinitate, as it is of only marginal importance 
for our purposes. Thomas’s other reference to Augustine, also found in the 
sed contra but much more specific and precise, is to De doctrina christiana. 
In Sadous’s terms, this was the classic “disquisition on rhetoric for 
Christians.” For Marrou, it was situated in a precise place in a time of cul- 
tural decline, namely at the twilight of the ancient world.1°8 
De doctrina christiana was an obvious reference for Thomas. He well 
knew that, throughout history, Augustine’s “discourse on method” had 
always been considered the theoretical foundation for theological inquiry 
and the exegetical analysis of Scripture; it outlined the principles for study 
within the sphere of Christian thought. The context from which Aquinas 
drew his citation of De doctrina christiana, namely from chapter 40 
107 [Jerome, Epistola ad Pammachium (ep. 66), 644 “Sin autem adamaveris captivam 
mulierem, id est, sapientiam saecularem, et ejus pulchritudine captus fueris, decalva eam, 
et illecebras crinium atque ornamenta verborum cum emortuis unguibus seca. Lava eam 
Prophetali nitro, et tunc requiescens cum illa, dicito: ‘Sinistra ejus sub capite meo, et dex- 
tra illius amplexabitur me’ [Cant. 2:6], et multo tibi foetus captiva dabit, ac de Moabitide 
efficietur Israelitis.”] 
108 [Alfred L. de Sadous, Sancti Augustini de doctrina Christiana libri exponuntur, seu de 
rhetorica apud Christianos disquisitio (Paris: apud Joubert Bibliopolam, 1847); Marrou, 
Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture antique. | 


[PDF page 237]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 217 
of book II, gives prominence and specific meaning to the Augustinian 
passage adduced in the sed contra. For it is precisely in book II that 
Augustine systematically treats of signs (signa), i.e. the linguistic and argu- 
mentative instruments, the various forms of knowledge and of inquiry 
that made up the classical culture institutionalized in the curriculum of 
the liberal arts (artes liberales). Augustine’s treatment is both semiological 
and methodological. Its aim is to identify the possible uses of antiquity’s 
cognitive instruments with a view to the Christian faith and its contents 
— the res, the divine truths about which Augustine had spoken at length in 
the first book of De doctrina. This is the context in which Augustine, in the 
final pages of book II (chs. 40-42), considers the relationship between 
philosophy and theology. There he identifies the reasons and adduces 
the justifications for allowing even the most eminent branch of ancient 
knowledge to undergo a conversion (conversio) for Christian use. 
Augustine writes: 
If anything true or suitable to our faith has ever been said by those called 
philosophers, especially the Platonists, not only should it not be feared, but 
it ought to be claimed for our own use from them as if from unlawful 
possessors.109 
This is the passage cited by Aquinas in the sed contra, but with a variant 
and an omission that show his own peculiar take on it. Thomas leaves out 
the phrase “especially the Platonists” and changes “ought to be claimed” 
(vindicanda) to “ought to be taken up” (assumenda). As for the missing 
“Platonists,” might Aquinas have had an interest (in the context of the sed 
contra, and above all in the corpus of his solution to the problem at hand) 
in enlarging and extending Augustine’s statement to all of pre-Christian 
philosophy, and perhaps even in insisting (“especially”) on the peripatetic 
strain (“Aristotelians”), thus diverging from Augustine’s view on Greco- 
Hellenistic culture? 
Regarding the expression “ought to be claimed” (vindicanda), it is 
immediately connected in Augustine’s text to the discourse that follows, 
and its meaning is illustrated allegorically with a scriptural reference to 
Exodus 3:22, 11:2, and 12:35. In contrast, Thomas’s substitution of assumenda 
for vindicanda removes the statement from its immediate context and 
109 Augustine, De doctrina christiana, II.40.1-4: “Philosophi autem qui vocantur si qua 
forte vera et fidei nostrae accommodata dixerunt, maxime Platonici, non solum formi- 
danda non sunt, sed ab eis etiam tamquam ab iniustis possessoribus in usum nostrum 
vindicanda.” 


[PDF page 238]
218 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
obscures Augustine’s specific solution for reducing Greek and pagan phil- 
osophical knowledge to Christian preaching. Augustine’s text continues: 
For just as the Egyptians had not only idols ... but also vases and ornaments 
of gold and silver and clothing which that people [sc. the Israelites], when 
leaving Egypt, secretly claimed as its own so as to put them to better use ..., 
thus the combined teachings of the pagans not only include false and super- 
stitious images and heavy burdens of superfluous toil, which each of us, 
departing the community of pagans with Christ as our guide, ought to 
despise and avoid; but they also contain liberal disciplines that are quite 
suited to the service of the truth as well as certain very useful moral teach- 
ings .... What is perversely and unjustly abused in obedience to demons, a 
Christian ought to carry away and apply to the just employment of preach- 
ing the Gospel. 
In the same ecclesial tradition as Jerome in his Letter to Magnus, Augustine 
also validates the historical possibility of harnessing philosophy to evan- 
gelical preaching and thus to theological knowledge. As doctrinal models 
he adduces the greatest figures of Christian literature and evangelical pas- 
toral practice, making reference to the early Church Fathers both Greek 
(‘innumerable Greeks”) and Latin (Cyprian, Lactantius, Hilary, and oth- 
ers). But what is distinctive in Augustine’s proposition — the “claim,” or 
redemption (in the strong sense of the term in Roman law), of aspects of 
culture, such as ethical and social forms as well as civil institutions, for use 
within Christianity — was derived from a doctrinal premise that had origi- 
nally been elaborated by the Judeo-Alexandrian school and was widely 
diffused in the West (as restated, for example, by Ambrose). It consisted in 
the belief that pagan philosophy, and in particular Greek philosophy 
(especially Platonism), was derived from the most ancient Old Testament 
Scriptures and subsequently misappropriated for a use contrary to Judeo- 
Christian revelation. Thus it is both legitimate and necessary — Augustine 
argues in book II, chapters 41-42 of De doctrina christiana — to claim for 
Christianity that which had belonged to it by ancient right: to redeem 
what had been carried away into slavery in “foreign” lands, to lead 
10 Jbid., II.40.4—-23: “Sicut enim Aegyptii non tantum idola habebant ... sed etiam vasa 
atque omamenta de auro et argento et vestem, quae ille populus exiens de Aegypto sibi 
potius tamquam ad usum meliorem clanculo vindicavit ..., sic doctrinae omnes gentilium 
non solum simulata et superstitiosa figmenta gravesque sarcinas supervacanei laboris 
habent, quae unusquisque nostrum duce Christo de societate gentilium exiens debet 
abominari atque vitare, sed etiam liberales disciplinas usui veritatis aptiores et quaedam 
morum praecepta utilissima continent ... et, quo perverse atque iniuriose ad obsequia dae- 
monum abutuntur ..., debet ab eis auferre christianus ad usum iustum praedicandi 
Evangelii.” 


[PDF page 239]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 219 
doctrines and institutions that had been deformed and abused back to 
their country of origin, purifying them and restoring them “to freedom.” 
All this follows the example of Christ, who had redeemed man and the 
world from the rule of evil and had restored the spirit and the cosmos to 
the freedom of the Gospel. 
4! On the traditional double reference to Jerome and Augustine and related texts, cf: 
Ernst Robert Curtius, European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages (London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, 1953), 39-42, 72-74, 446-450; R.R. Bolgar, The Classical Heritage and its 
Beneficiaries (London: Cambridge University Press, 1973), 45-58; Henri de Lubac, Exégése 
Médiévale. Les quatre sens de l‘Ecriture, 2 vols. (Paris: Aubier, 1959), 1:290-304. In the appa- 
ratus to the text of the Expositio super librum Boethii de Trinitate, Decker did not note the 
missing “especially the Platonists” (maxime Platonici) in the text of Augustine cited by 
Thomas in “Sed contra ... 5. Praeterea” (p. 93.15). For a critical text of De doctrina christiana, 
see the edition of Josef Martin in Corpus Christianorum, Series Latina 32 (Tumhout: 
Brepols, 1962) (p. 73: bk. II, ch. 40 = PL 34: 63). Augustine’s “especially the Platonists” is not 
missing from Aquinas’s quotation of the same passage in his Contra impugnantes Dei cul- 
tum et religionem (1255/56): Thomas Aquinas, Opera omnia, Leonine ed., vol. 41 (Roma: 
St. Thomas Aquinas Foundation, 1970), ch. 11.135-140, p. A133; on the opuscule’s origin and 
polemical aims, see H.-F. Dondaine’s introduction in ibid., pp. A5—13. But it is necessary to 
say more on this topic. Ch. 1 (“de hoc quod religiosi studio vacant”) and the successive ch. 
12 (“de hoc quod religiosi verbum Dei ornate et gratiose proponunt”) of Contra impugn- 
antes (pp. A131-34, A134—37) constitute an extremely pregnant correlative passage to 
Article 3, Question II of the Commentary on Boethius. These two chapters of Contra impug- 
nantes prove to be, in the very structure of their argumentative procedure — to say nothing 
of their contents — the literary precedent (regardless of the precise order of composition) 
of Article 3, Question II of the Commentary on Boethius. If in the Commentary Augustine 
and Jerome are introduced as authorities to determine the theoretical foundations of the- 
ology, in Contra impugnantes the same patristic citations (including the quotation of 
whole passages, used more fully than in the Commentary) are adduced to provide a foun- 
dation and defense, in opposition to the anti-mendicant criticisms of the Paris university 
world, of the very practice of theological study and teaching and of the kerygmatic praedi- 
catio. Hence Aquinas’s insistence in affirming “that it is suitable for doctors of sacred 
Scripture to use secular eloquence and wisdom” (ch. 12.144—46, p. A136: “quod doctoribus 
sacrae Scripturae convenit eloquentia et sapientia saeculari uti”). He further insists, reveal- 
ing its full historical meaning, on both the compossibility and the necessity of synthesizing 
the “study of secular literature” (“studium litterarum saecularium”) with “the study of 
sacred literature” (“studium litterarum sacrarum”); he subscribes to the dictates of Jerome’s 
Letter to Pammachius and recommends continually “making time” (“vacatio”) for the study 
of classical and Judeo-Christian texts (ch. 1.n9ff., p. A133). Nevertheless, from the overall 
context it seems clear not only that “secular wisdom and eloquence” are understood as 
providing immediate and direct service to theology (“sacra doctrina”), but also, and more 
importantly — we highlight this in relation to our subject — that the following points of 
theological methodology are put forward. The first consists in the fact that the primacy 
of “wisdom” (as the handmaiden to theological science) over “eloquence,” that is of phi- 
losophy over rhetoric, remains absolute and clear. The second is that “eloquence” is con- 
ceived and viewed along the lines (and within the limits) of omamentation (ornatus) (“for 
the ornamentation of words, after the manner of the rhetoricians,” ch. 12.204f., p. A136: “ad 
ornatum verborum ut rhetores faciunt”). Now, both the first and the second points, or bet- 
ter both together, characterize and describe what Seigel has called the “Ciceronian model”; 
indeed, they are the constants of the rhetorical tradition of “Ciceronianism.” See Jerrold 


[PDF page 240]
220 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
E. Seigel, Rhetoric and Philosophy in Renaissance Humanism. The Union of Eloquence and 
Wisdom, Petrarch to Valla (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968), 3-30; and 
Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 76-87. It has not been possible to con- 
sult Edward Kennard Rand, Cicero in the Courtroom of St. Thomas (Milwaukee: Marquette 
University Press, 1946). This means that also from the perspective of the use of secular 
literature (litterae saeculares) within the realm of the study and the teaching of theology 
(academic and pastoral), a profound difference distinguishes Valla from Thomas: rheto- 
ric, as it is employed by Valla in the service of theological science, is placed outside of 
“Ciceronianism” and, differently from Thomas’s conception, is essentially inscribed in 
the “Quintilianesque model.” But this topic will be fully treated in the fourth part of the 
present essay. Here it is important to cite a passage from ch. 12 of Contra impugnantes, 
significant for its theoretical denseness and synthesis, which must be kept in mind during 
the discussion of Valla’s Quintilianesque rhetoric and theological investigations. 
Thomas’s text reads: “It should be known... that the use of secular wisdom and eloquence 
in theology is in a certain way to be approved, in another to be blamed. It is to be blamed 
when someone uses them for boastful ostentation or when he is chiefly interested in 
secular wisdom and eloquence: for then he thinks it necessary either to be silent about or 
to reject what is not approved by secular knowledge, such as articles of faith that are 
above human reason. And likewise whoever is chiefly interested in eloquence has as his 
object to lead his listeners to admiration not of the subject of his speech, but of the 
speaker himself; this is the way that worldly wisdom and eloquence were used by the 
pseudo-apostles, against whom the Apostle spoke in his letter to the Corinthians .... It is, 
however, to be approved when someone uses secular wisdom and eloquence not for the 
display of his own vanity but for the utility of his audience, who are thus at any moment 
more easily and more effectively taught or, if adversaries, convinced; and likewise when 
someone does not treat them chiefly as ends but uses them as means in the service of 
sacred doctrine, which is his chief interest, just as he takes up all other things in its service 
..., it was thus that the apostles, too, used eloquence. Hence Augustine in bk. IV [ch. 7] of 
De doctrina christiana says that in the words of the Apostle wisdom was the guide with 
eloquence following as its fellow, and wisdom in the lead did not cast off eloquence fol- 
lowing behind. But nevertheless later doctors have since made greater use of secular wis- 
dom and eloquence, and this is the reason why earlier it was not philosophers and 
rhetoricians who were chosen to preach but common folk and fishermen, who then con- 
verted the philosophers and orators: the reason is so that our faith would not consist in 
human wisdom but in the power of God’ (ibid., ch. 12.147-87, p. A136: “Sciendum ... est 
quod uti sapientia et eloquentia saeculari in sacra doctrina quodammodo commendatur 
et quodammodo reprehenditur. Reprehenditur quidem quando aliquis ad iactantiam eis 
utitur et quando eloquentiae et sapientiae saeculari principaliter studet: tunc enim opor- 
tet quod illa vel taceat vel neget quae saecularis scientia non approbat, sicut articulos 
fidei qui sunt supra rationem humanam. Et similiter qui eloquentiae principaliter studet, 
homines non intendit ducere in admirationem eorum quae dicit sed dicentis; et hoc 
modo mundana sapientia et eloquentia pseudoapostoli utebantur contra quos Apostolus 
loquitur in epistola ad Corinthios .... Commendatur autem quando non ad se ostentan- 
dum sed ad utilitatem audientium, qui sic quandoque facilius et efficacius instruuntur 
vel convincuntur adversarii, utitur aliquis sapientia et eloquentia saeculari; et iterum 
quando aliquis non principaliter eis intendit sed eis utitur in obsequium sacrae doctrinae 
cui principaliter inhaeret, ut sic omnia alia in obsequium eius assumat ... et ita etiam 
apostoli eloquentia utebantur. Unde Augustinus in IV De doctrina christiana dicit quod 
in verbis Apostli erat dux sapientia et sequens comes eloquentia, et sapientia praecedens 
eloquentiam sequentem non respuebat. Sed tamen posteriores doctores adhuc magis usi 
sunt sapientia et eloquentia saeculari propter eandem rationem qua non prius philoso- 
phi et rhetores sunt electi ad praedicandum, sed plebei et piscatores qui postmodum 
philosophos et oratores converterunt: ut scilicet fides nostra non consistat in sapientia 
hominum sed in virtute Dei’). 


[PDF page 241]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 221 
3.1.6. The Propositions of Jerome and Augustine: ‘Appropriation’ of Ancient 
Rhetoric (Jerome), “Re-Appropriation” of Greek Philosophy (Augustine), 
and the Corpus of Article 3 in Thomas’s Commentary on Boethius 
Both Jerome’s and Augustine’s propositions — which lay out the guiding 
parameters for overcoming the antinomy between classical culture and 
theological knowledge — began from the possibility of reducing philoso- 
phy in some way to an epistemological instrument of the “science of 
divine things.” Nevertheless, the two propositions ultimately took differ- 
ent directions that, in typical patristic fashion, were expressed through 
the (allegorical) reference to different scriptural passages. Jerome cited 
the prescriptions of Deuteronomy 21:10-14; Augustine referred to the 
events of Exodus 3:22, 11:2, and 12:35. Hence their divergent solutions to 
the antinomy between Greco-Hellenistic culture and Christian theologi- 
cal knowledge — a divergence that not only affected the modalities and 
issues immediately at hand but also had far-reaching consequences and 
implications. Jerome was concerned with converting the cultural instru- 
ments of the classical world to the service of the Word of God and the 
Sacred Scriptures, i.e. with appropriating the philological techniques and 
categorical schemes of ancient rhetoric. These were to be employed as 
instruments of Christian knowledge — of that alternative culture that was 
emerging from the community of believers in the Gospel. For Augustine 
(especially as seen in the later development of his theological speculation 
and in the influence of Augustinianism on the tradition of the Latin 
Church), at issue was instead a reconversion of Greek philosophy (espe- 
cially Platonism), and thus a re-appropriation of classical metaphysical 
speculation. To his mind, it could and should provide theology with theo- 
retical parameters for investigating Christian revelation and understand- 
ing the relationship between the City of God and that of men. At this point 
we might preview in passing what we shall see in our upcoming analysis: 
on the one hand, Valla takes up Quintilian’s rhetoric, along Jerome’s lines 
of appropriation, in the service of a humanist theology; on the other, 
Thomas Aquinas seeks ontological foundations for reducing Greek phi- 
losophy to theological knowledge, and, in line with Augustine’s directive 
of re-appropriation, he makes the natural truths of the pre-Christian world 
flow into the science of faith (scientia fidei). 
Before turning to Valla’s texts, however, let us first examine the solution 
proposed by Thomas (to the question “whether in the science of faith ... it 
is permissible to use the arguments of the philosophers”) in the corpus of 
Article 3. Here is the central passage: 


[PDF page 242]
222 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Now, as sacred doctrine is founded upon the light of faith, so philosophy 
depends upon the light of natural reason; wherefore it is impossible that 
philosophical truths are contrary to those that are of faith; but they are defi- 
cient as compared to them. Nevertheless they incorporate some similitudes 
of those higher truths, and some things that are preparatory for them, just as 
nature is the preamble to grace. If, however, anything is found in the teach- 
ings of the philosophers contrary to faith, this error does not properly belong 
to philosophy, but is due to an abuse of philosophy owing to the insuffi- 
ciency of reason. Therefore also it is possible from the principles of philoso- 
phy to refute an error of this kind, either by showing it to be altogether 
impossible, or not to be necessary. For just as those things which are of faith 
cannot be demonstratively proved, so certain things contrary to them can- 
not be demonstratively shown to be false, but they can be shown not to be 
necessary. Thus, in sacred doctrine we are able to make a threefold use of 
philosophy ....!2 
Aquinas continues with the various concrete ways in which philosophy, in 
different contexts and on different levels, aids in the science of faith. First, 
it provides “preambles of faith” (concerning God and his creatures). 
Second, there are analogical relationships that connect philosophical to 
theological knowledge, the role of which is 
to give a clearer notion, by certain similitudes, of the truths of faith, 
as Augustine in his book, De Trinitate, employed many comparisons 
taken from the teachings of the philosophers to aid understanding of the 
Trinity. 
Finally, philosophical doctrines, or better their apologetic force, can be 
used 
to resist those things that are said against the faith, either by showing 
that such statements are false, or by showing that they are not necessarily 
true. 
12 Aquinas, Expositio super librum Boethii de Trinitate, quae. 2, art. 3: “Sicut autem sacra 
doctrina fundatur supra lumen fidei, ita philosophia fundatur supra lumen naturale ratio- 
nis; unde impossibile est quod ea, quae sunt philosophiae, sint contraria his quae sunt 
fidei, sed deficiunt ab eis. Continent autem aliquas eorum similitudines et quaedam ad ea 
praeambula, sicut natura praeambula est ad gratiam. Si quid autem in dictis philosopho- 
rum invenitur contrarium fidei, hoc non est philosophia, sed magis philosophiae abusus ex 
defectu rationis. Et ideo possibile est ex principiis philosophiae huiusmodi errorem refell- 
ere vel ostendendo omnino esse impossibile vel ostendendo non esse necessarium. Sicut 
enim ea quae sunt fidei non possunt demonstrative probari, ita quaedam contraria eis non 
possunt demonstrative ostendi esse falsa, sed potest ostendi ea non esse necessaria. Sic 
ergo in sacra doctrina philosophia possumus tripliciter uti ...” (tr. Brennan). 
1S Ibid., quae. 2, art. 3: “preambula fidei ... ad notificandum per aliquas similitudines 
quae sunt fidei, sicut Augustinus in libro de Trinitate utitur multis similitudinibus ex 


[PDF page 243]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 223 
Augustine’s position on the possibility of reconverting philosophy to 
theological knowledge, of re-appropriating philosophy within the sci- 
ence of faith, appears distinctly in Aquinas’s text. Thus Thomas reaf- 
firms the possibility of reversing the negative aspects, or “abuses,” that 
constituted the limits within which philosophy had been confined by 
pre-Christian culture, just as the Hebrew people culturally “plundered” 
the religion of the Egyptians, who had made an abuse of precious vases 
and sacred ornaments and attire for idolatrous rites in honor of a false 
divinity. Moreover, towards the end of the corpus Aquinas affirms, retrac- 
ing the argument of De doctrina christiana (book II, chs. 41 and 42), that 
Augustine’s proposition remains valid despite the fact that a renewed 
abuse of philosophy could always crop up within theological study and 
scriptural exegesis. Aquinas even notes that this eventuality had already 
come to pass and could come about again in several apparently contrast- 
ing but actually identical ways — for all would amount to an undue exalta- 
tion of philosophy over faith and Christian knowledge. Thomas points 
to Origen as an historical example of such an exaltation of classical 
philosophical culture: “by using doctrines contrary to faith, which are 
not truths of philosophy, but rather error, or abuse of philosophy, as 
Origen did.”"4 
The other possible abuse of philosophy is more complex in its conse- 
quences and takes two fundamentally contrary forms. It consists either in 
rationalistically reducing faith to culture, or in positing relationships or 
parallels between the two that make them seem indistinct from one 
another. Either way, the union of faith and culture is pushed in a highly 
attractive and suggestive direction, tending on the one hand towards 
rationalism, on the other towards syncretism. In the first case, the result is 
that “the truths of faith are subject to the yardstick of philosophy, as if one 
should be willing to believe nothing except what could be held by 
philosophic reasoning” (as is said in the final lines of the corpus)."° In 
the second case, however — which is the exact opposite of the preceding 
error — culture is used as a “primary” (quasi principalis) rather than an 
doctrinis philosophicis sumptis ad manifestandam Trinitatem ... ad resistendum his quae 
contra fidem dicuntur, sive ostendendo ea esse falsa sive ostendendo ea non esse neces- 
saria” (tr. Brennan). 
14 [bid., quae. 2, art. 3: “utendo his quae sunt contra fidem, quae non sunt philosophiae 
sed corruptio vel abusus eius, sicut Origines fecit” (tr. Brennan, emphasis added). 
US Jbid., quae. 2, art. 3: “ea quae sunt fidei includantur sub metis philosophiae, ut scili- 
cet si aliquis credere nolit nisi quod per philosophiam haberi potest” (tr. Brennan, 
modified). 


[PDF page 244]
224 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
“ancillary” (quasi secundaria) tool in the contextual support and defense 
of faith, “as if the truth of faith were believed on account of [philosophical 
doctrine]” (as is said in the ad primum)."® 
That Aquinas’s argumentation moves along the lines of Augustine’s 
proposition becomes even more explicit from the series of rebuttals to the 
objections. For Thomas those objections are without real basis, since the 
secular wisdom of which Paul speaks can in itself (“insofar as it is true”) be 
neither the source of theological or dogmatic error nor the origin of heresy 
(ad secundum). This is especially the case insofar as philosophy is placed 
in “subordination” to theological knowledge (ad septimum) and philo- 
sophical proofs (documenta philosophica) are ordained (“on account of 
the reasonableness of the doctrine”) for use as instruments of scriptural 
analysis “in the service of faith” (ad quintum and ad octavum). Classical 
culture, therefore, despite its manipulation by heretical movements, is not 
something that must be considered as “having to be avoided” (vitandum)); 
indeed, only the abuse of philosophical doctrines “leads to error” (ad sex- 
tum)."7 Aquinas must also rebut the objection that the development of 
theological thought had in some way betrayed the primitive “artlessness” 
(simplicitas) and original “fragility” (infirmitas) of apostolic preaching, 
which rested entirely on the intrinsic potentiality of faith and on the wis- 
dom of the Gospel. With a significant emphasis on the historical develop- 
ment of Christianity, he argues that, since the hegemony of the Christian 
faith had by now been established in the world, it was also necessary to 
re-subject power and worldly wisdom to the God of revelation (ad 
primum) .}8 
u6 Tbid., quae. 2, art. 3: “ut scilicet propter eam [sc. doctrinam philosophorum] veritas 
fidei credatur.” 
U7 Tbid., quae. 2, art. 3: “quantum ad eius veritatem” (ad secundum), “propter rationem 
dictorum” (ad octavum), “in obsequium fidei” (ad quintum), “solum in errorem ducit” (ad 
sextum) (tr. Brennan, modified). 
u8 The fundamental study, also because it uses the earlier work of Mandonnet, Congar, 
Chenu and others, is Martin Grabmann’s ample analytical and historical work, Die theolo- 
gische Erkenntnis- und Einleitungslehre des hl. Thomas von Aquin, auf Grund seiner Schrift In 
Boethium de Trinitate, in Zusammenhang der Scholastik des 13. und beginnenden 14. 
Jahrhunderts dargestellt (Freiburg, Switzerland: Paulus, 1948). In particular see ch. 1 (pp. 
1-32) and ch. 4 (pp. 101-186), for the contemporary cultural context and the analysis of 
Question II, Article 3. Important are the references to the doctrinal theses against which 
Aquinas argues, and the study of the developments given rise to by the “discourse on theo- 
logical method” elaborated by Thomas in his Expositio. A direct reading of Chenu, La 
Théologie comme science au XIIle siécle, is still useful. 


[PDF page 245]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 225 
3.1.7. Thomas's Solution to the Antinomy between Philosophy and Theology 
and His Transcendence of Jerome’s “Capture” and Augustine's “Claim” 
The preceding observations on the above-cited passage of the corpus of 
Article 3 and on the related rebuttals to the objections (pro and contra, 
which preface the article) must now be delimited and in some way tran- 
scended. The goal is to arrive at Thomas’s specific solution regarding the 
relationship between philosophy and theology, to identify the determin- 
ing and defining element that constitutes his original contribution to the 
question “whether in the science of faith it is permissible to use the argu- 
ments of the philosophers.” From what has been said so far, it would be 
reductive and misleading to conclude that Thomas remained tied to what 
has been called, by way of simplification, the Augustinian line. It is there- 
fore necessary to return to the passage cited from the corpus, as it contains 
the essential core of the whole article’s argumentation and of Thomas’s 
response to the antinomy between philosophy and theology — the central 
problem of this section of the Commentary on Boethius. 
It has been shown how Aquinas’s argumentation on this point is located 
within the patristic context of Augustine’s “claim” or “redemption” (vindi- 
catio, in De doctrina christiana), on the one hand, and Jerome’s “capture” 
(reductio in captivitatem, in his letters), on the other. In other words, both 
notions — the “claiming” of an idolatrous ritual patrimony, to be put to the 
(culturally alternative) service of the God of Israel, as well as the “capture” 
of the “beautiful Moabite” — are used by Thomas as patristic citations and 
normative premises for his solution to the antinomy between secular and 
divine wisdom. But the emphasis placed on Augustine’s proposition leads 
Thomas to take a further step, one that only seems to continue the same 
line of thought. Actually, there is a qualitative difference in both the for- 
mulation and the foundation of his solution to the problem. Both 
Augustine’s proposition and, even more explicitly and pointedly, Jerome’s 
remained within a sphere that could be characterized as juridical (“claim”) 
and historical (“capture”). Thomas transcends Augustine and Jerome pre- 
cisely by crossing that juridical and historical horizon, by founding his 
solution to the whole problematic on an ontological plain and by sketch- 
ing out, on that basis, a new principle for theological study. 
The central point of Thomas’s argument, which constitutes the criterial 
basis for transcending the antinomy in question, is formulated thus: 
“nature is the preamble to grace” (natura preambula est ad gratiam). 
This guideline, although compressed into an abbreviated formula, is 
the Thomist principle of theology as the science of faith. The immediate 


[PDF page 246]
226 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
application of this principle determines the criteria and parameters for 
theological study in its essential dimensions and in its constitutive aspects, 
from the level of gnoseology to that of epistemology and, above all, 
methodology. 
The specific gnoseological place of philosophy vis-a-vis theology is 
illustrated in the following analogical (but not univocal) relationship: phi- 
losophy is to the light of reason as theology is to the light of faith (philoso- 
phia : lumen rationis :: sacra doctrina : lumen fidei). This gnoseological 
analogy is undergirded by the ontological relationship between nature 
and grace (natura : gratia), as a relationship of the objective possibility 
(in Thomist terms, of potentia oboedientialis, or obediential potency) of 
nature acting as an infinite gateway to saving grace. This is the true mean- 
ing of the statement, “nature is the preamble to grace.” 
But this entails, as an immediate consequence, the possibility of episte- 
mological transfer between the two poles of nature and grace. In fact, the 
ontological relationship between them implies that they are linked to one 
another by certain likenesses, denoted by Thomas as quaedam similitudi- 
nes. This formulation is indicative of the contrary pair of similarity and 
dissimilarity (between nature and grace) that underlies Aquinas’s whole 
theological discourse, especially — and almost systematically — as it 
appears in the Summa theologiae. The phrase quaedam similitudines 
expresses both the multiple similarities between the two poles of nature 
and grace (through the variable of similitudo) and the permanent, infinite 
difference between them (through the constant of the qualifier quoddam 
or quodammodo — “certain” — which recurs so often throughout the 
Summa). 
In this sense, Thomas’s theological argumentation arrives at logical 
structures and consequential nexuses first and foremost on the basis of 
the principle of analogy: secundum quid idem, simpliciter diversum (“the 
same in some respects, different in itself”). Ultimately this kind of argu- 
mentative procedure becomes a defining characteristic, in the intensity 
and extent of its use, of Thomas's writing. By constantly adhering to the 
principle of analogy, Aquinas succeeds in supplying his theological dis- 
course with the aid of classical philosophy while at the same time avoid- 
ing the two abuses of philosophy: subjecting the truths of faith “to the 
yardstick of philosophy,” on the one hand, and forcing philosophical argu- 
mentation into the space reserved for theology, on the other. 
Let us digress a moment and make use of concepts and terms from 
the language and operations of mathematical analysis to help us better 
configure the dimensions and perspectives of Aquinas’s solution to the 


[PDF page 247]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 227 
epistemological problem of the relationship between philosophy and 
theology. Let nature and grace be thought of as two functions, expres- 
sions corresponding to two geometric curves. We could then think of 
secundum quid idem as the “limit” of convergence, and simpliciter diver- 
sum as the divergence “to infinity.” We could then compare the theological 
study of the analogical relationship between nature and grace to the 
mathematical analysis of the “limit” by means of approximation to an 
“infinitesimal.” 
Analogy is thus the foundation on which the whole epistemological 
principle of the science of faith rests. Nevertheless, on account of the dif- 
ferent gnoseological statuses accorded to philosophy and theology as well 
as of the specific epistemological connection between the two “sciences,” 
Aquinas is ultimately induced to establish — in order to better define his 
own response to the question at hand — the methodological lines (both 
divergent and approximately convergent) of the argumentative proce- 
dures proper to philosophy and to theology. 
Philosophical argumentation should by its nature exclude error. Still, it 
can easily result in error on account of what Aquinas calls “abuse” and 
identifies, from the point of view of deductive logic, as “an insufficiency of 
reason’ (ex defectu rationis). Nonetheless — and this is said explicitly in the 
text of the corpus — once philosophical error is discovered to be such from 
the point of view of faith and thus in the theological dimension, it can be 
corrected and overcome by a further application of philosophical argu- 
mentation. By means of a more penetrating analysis, but still remaining 
within the realm of rational investigation, philosophical argumentation 
can reach the following conclusions about a philosophical proposition 
that is contrary to the truths of faith: either its non-truth or, at the least, its 
non-necessity (since contrary to what is known through revelation). The 
corpus reads: 
Therefore also it is possible from the principles of philosophy to refute an 
error of this kind [i-e., one that is contrary to faith], either by showing it to be 
altogether impossible, or not to be necessary. 
Theology, on the other hand, lacks demonstrative argumentation with 
regard to its own specific object (the truth of revelation). Nor, as a result of 
its epistemological status, does it even possess the logico-deductive tools 
for demonstrating the non-truth of philosophical error contrary to the 
truth of faith. It can only indicate or identify, by means of indirect argu- 
ment, the non-necessity of such a philosophical proposition. To return 
once again to Thomas’s text: 


[PDF page 248]
228 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
For just as those things which are of faith cannot be demonstratively proved, 
so certain things contrary to them cannot be demonstratively shown to be 
false, but they can be shown not to be necessary. (emphasis added) 
Thus the distinctions already underlined on the gnoseological and episte- 
mological level are repeated on the methodological level as well. From a 
logico-argumentative point of view, the two “sciences” diverge without a 
continuous solution, and thus neither interference nor immediate trans- 
fer between them is possible. Such an argumentative procedure — as has 
already been seen with Aquinas’s responses to the objections prefacing 
the article in question — would lead either to a type of philosophical ratio- 
nalism (the reduction of theology to philosophy) or to its contrary (the 
reduction of philosophy to theology): a theological syncretism that, only 
when used ideologically, can succeed in establishing immediate implica- 
tions and univocally apodictic (“demonstrative”) connections between 
qualitatively different levels. But beyond these procedures of reduction, 
which in one direction favor theology and in the other philosophy —- a 
most disagreeable “mixture of water and wine” (ad quintum) — Aquinas 
sees a deeper, intrinsic relationship between classical philosophy and 
Christian theology: a “subordinate” relationship (in subordinatione), in 
which the principle of analogy directs the use of philosophical categories 
within the language that is specific and proper to faith. The ontological 
foundation for such a logical and cognitive transfer — and not only on the 
theoretical level, as Augustine noted in De doctrina christiana — is 
expressed in the formula “nature is the preamble to grace.” Thomas thus 
takes up and expands Augustine’s proposition for resolving the antinomy 
between Christian faith and classical culture, but at the same time he 
moves it onto a theoretical plain informed by ontological and theological 
principles.!!9 
3.1.8. Thomas’s Commentary and the Controversy over Philosophy in the 
Parisian Faculty in the First Half of the Thirteenth Century 
Aquinas’s reformulation of Augustine’s proposition in his extremely lucid 
Commentary on Boethius (1255/59) actually constituted a position diamet- 
tically opposed to the conservative views of his contemporaries, which 
prevailed not only in the Parisian theology faculty but also within the 
"9 On Aquinas’s responses to the obiectiones, which represent various contemporary 
and traditional doctrinal positions, cf. Grabmann, Die theologische, esp. 179-186. It must be 
added, though, that we interpret Thomas’s text differently from Grabmann. 


[PDF page 249]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 229 
Dominican Order itself in the first decades of the thirteenth century. 
Opposition to and condemnation of Aristotle had ultimately — and inevi- 
tably — resulted in the radicalization of the dichotomy between philoso- 
phy and theology, especially in light of the introduction of a conspicuous 
part of the Aristotelian corpus (above all the Physics) into various cultural 
centers. This went well beyond a simple defensive stance proclaiming the 
impossibility of the co-existence of the “kingdom of the spirit of Christ” 
(regnum spiritus Christi) with the “lordship of the spirit of Aristotle” (domi- 
nium spiritus Aristotelis). It had by then been forcefully asserted and 
argued, on the basis of epistemological and methodological principles, 
that the “materialism” of Aristotle’s Physics and De anima were in conflict 
with the dictates of faith, that philosophical culture and the special ana- 
lytical tools of Aristotelianism were incompatible with — indeed, could 
not co-exist with — theological study and the scriptural investigation of 
the Divine Word. What is more, strict ideological warnings had been 
issued regarding the dangers of the secularization of the sacred study of 
theology. Was it not perhaps in these terms that the Dominican Jean de 
Saint-Gilles expressed himself, when in 1230 he reprimanded those who 
claimed to apply themselves to theology with all the baggage of their 
Aristotelianism and of other disciplines unrelated to theological knowl- 
edge? Jean, then the titulary of the Dominican Order's chair of theology in 
Paris, chastised this error openly, even, and perhaps especially, to those 
who ought to have been aware of the special nature of the science of 
theology: 
There are some people who have learned the spiritual language, i.e., theol- 
ogy, well but nevertheless introduce barbarisms into it, corrupting it with 
philosophy. For whoever has learned metaphysics always wants to proceed 
metaphysically in sacred Scripture, just as whoever has learned geometry 
always speaks of points and lines in theology. Such men dress the king in 
dirty and tattered robes; likewise they sprinkle dust into light, thus giving 
birth to stinging insects.!2° 
Odo of Chateauroux, chancellor of the church of Paris, speaks in the same 
terms: 
120 Mandonnet, Siger de Brabant et l’Averroisme latin au XIIIme siecle, 1:33, n.1: “Sunt 
aliqui qui bene linguam spiritualem didicerunt, id est theologiam, sed tamen in ea barba- 
rizant, eam per philosophiam corrumpentes; qui enim metaphysicam didicit semper vult 
in sacra Scriptura metaphysice procedere: similiter qui geometriam didicit semper loqui- 
tur de punctis et lineis in theologia. Tales induunt regem vestibus sordidis et laceratis; item 
spargunt pulverem in lucem et inde nascuntur cyniphes.” 


[PDF page 250]
230 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
It is reprehensible for the theological faculty, which is and is called the city 
of the sun of truth and understanding, to strive to speak in the language of 
the philosophers. That is, those who study and teach in the theological fac- 
ulty try to furnish it with authority from the sayings of the philosophers, as if 
such had not been handed down by the highest wisdom, which is the font of 
all other wisdom .... Many almost despise the words of theology and of the 
saints but think those of philosophy and of the pagans to be the best, and 
they sell themselves to the sons of the Greeks, that is to the philosophers.’2" 
The passages by these two figures (who were mentioned before the exami- 
nation of Thomas’s text) have been reproduced here almost in their 
entirety, as they are exemplary and indicative of the polemic against phi- 
losophy that was waged by Parisian theologians in the first half of the thir- 
teenth century. Above all they are emblematic of the context in which 
Aquinas outspokenly proffered his response to such sentiments. For 
Thomas, philosophy is the indispensable instrument (organon) for creat- 
ing a new theoretical foundation for theology. And philosophy, precisely 
as secular wisdom — and despite the (Pauline) antinomy between it, on the 
one hand, and the “folly” of the Cross and divine wisdom, on the other — 
remained the noblest and historically the most fully developed cultural 
fruit, the most scientifically structured episteme, the most perfect model 
of rationality that Christendom could derive or receive from Greek and 
Hellenistic antiquity. Furthermore, this philosophy came to be identified 
precisely with Aristotelianism, which was taken up and reassessed in 
Thomas’s time as the synthesis of Greek culture and the richest source of 
analytical tools for the study of the material world. Nature (natura), hav- 
ing been rediscovered, was now studied and understood by way of the 
Aristotelian concept of physis.!22 
3.1.9. The Prologue to De libero arbitrio and Valla’s Renewal of the Anti- 
Philosophical Tradition 
The passages cited above of the two eminent Parisians, polemicizing 
against philosophy and for the purity of “spiritual language,” lead us, on 
121 Jbid., 1:32, n. 3: “Reprehensibile est quod facultas theologiae, quae est et vocatur 
civitas solis veritatis et intelligentiae, nititur loqui lingua philosophorum, id est illi qui 
in facultate theologiae student et docent conantur ei praebere auctoritatem e dictis philos- 
ophorum, ac si non fuerit tradita a summa sapientia, a qua est omnis alia sapientia .... 
Multi, verba theologica et verba sanctorum quasi nihil habentes, verba philosophica, 
verba ethnicorum optima arbitrantur, et seipsos vendunt filiis Graecorum, id est 
philosophis.” 
122 Cf. Grabmann, Die theologische, 147-149. 


[PDF page 251]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 231 
the basis of literary similarities and common anti-philosophical elements, 
back to the opening pages of Valla’s De libero arbitrio. Valla’s discourse 
coincides with that of the Parisian theologians in defending the autonomy 
of theological “science” and excluding philosophy from the “Christian 
republic” (respublica christiana). For Valla, philosophy is a “pagan lan- 
guage” (sermo gentilis), which as a “foreign tongue” (lingua peregrina) pol- 
lutes “the language of Rome” (lingua vernacula Urbis). It is responsible for 
the corruption of the ecclesial community. It is fertile ground, a “seedbed” 
(seminarium), for “heresy.”!23 
In its immediate context, Valla’s text makes a specific reference that 
connects it to the whole anti-philosophical tradition and inserts it directly 
into the quarrel between Boethius and Peter Damian. Namely, it makes 
reference to the introduction of the propositional analysis of Aristotle’s 
On Interpretation into the theological treatment of the relationship 
between free will and predestination. This was a classic locus, then — on 
account of its philosophico-theological content and textual references 
(i-e., Boethius’s commentary on and use of ch. 9 of On Interpretation) — for 
Valla to use to introduce his basic theme: the polemic against philosophy, 
and the alternative proposal of rhetoric as a humanist guideline for 
theology. 
This becomes clear from an attentive reading of the argumentative 
development of De libero arbitrio, and especially from an analysis of the 
solutions proposed by the dialogue in its attempt to respond to the prob- 
lematic of divine predestination and human freedom. Here it suffices to 
point out that the reference (in the opening pages of De libero arbitrio) to 
“philosophical doctrines” takes on a specific meaning in the dialogue, in 
that Valla’s critique of philosophy is given a theological valence in order to 
resolve the antinomy between redemptive predestination and free will.!74 
In this particular case, the incompossibility between philosophy and the- 
ology is highlighted and made explicit in the contrast between the logical 
and ontological analysis of future contingents on the one hand (contained 
in ch. 9 of On Interpretation and developed variously by “modern” scholas- 
tic theologians from Boethius to Petrus Aureolus) and the scriptural 
dogma of redemptive predestination on the other.!26 
123 Valla, De libero arbitrio, 524-526. 
124 Thid., 524: “philosophicorum dogmatum.” 
125 Philotheus Boehner, The Tractatus de praedestinatione et de praescientiae Dei et de 
futuris contingentibus of William Ockham (New York: Franciscan Institute, 1945). But for 
an overview see also EJ. Ashworth, Language and Logic in the Post-Medieval Period 
(Dordrecht: Reidel, 1974). 


[PDF page 252]
232 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
If the theoretical nucleus of De libero arbitrio consists essentially in 
what has been said here, then it follows that Valla’s dialogue has an origi- 
nal and unique place in the history of theology. It represents a turning 
point between the crisis of the relationship between Aristotelianism and 
Christian dogma (which had already emerged, with Ockham and 
Ockhamism, within scholastic theology itself) and the renewal, at the 
beginning of the sixteenth century and especially with the Reformation, of 
the question of the “insoluble” antinomy between freedom and predesti- 
nation (then taken up on exegetico-scriptural grounds). That such is the 
meaning and the theoretical valence of Valla’s dialogue (with regard to the 
relationship between humanism and theology in the fifteenth century) 
will have to be demonstrated at greater length and with fuller documenta- 
tion elsewhere; here such an analysis would amount to an undue and 
excessive digression. Nevertheless we would like to conclude these con- 
siderations by mentioning the “silence” which the humanist theologian 
imposes — like an inviolable boundary — on the investigator of the mystery 
of redemption, lest the latter feel the need to choose between divine pre- 
destination and human freedom. In a context full of classical and scrip- 
tural (Pauline) references, Valla exhorts: 
Let us therefore shun greedy knowledge of high things, condescending 
rather to those of low estate. For nothing is of greater avail for Christian men 
than to feel humble .... I will no longer be anxious about this question lest by 
investigating the majesty of God I might be blinded by His light.!26 
But Valla’s exhortation for a theological understanding of the “mystery of 
salvation” (in the language of Paul) as an unfathomable limit — was this 
not after all a commonplace in the scholastic tradition? And did Thomas 
himself not perhaps dedicate the whole of Question II of his Commentary 
on Boethius to the “manifestation” (manifestatio) of the “secrets of faith” 
(secreta fidei) precisely in the hope of establishing the limits and the 
potentialities of theological understanding and knowledge (from the 
gnoseological plane to the linguistic one) with respect to this mystery? 
The answer to this double question is that the problem is undoubtedly the 
same in Aquinas and in Valla. But this does not change the fact that their 
respective solutions to the problem distinctly highlight the difference 
26 Valla, De libero arbitrio, 562: “Fugiamus igitur cupiditatem alta sapiendi, humilibus 
potius consentientes; christiani namque hominis nihil magis interest quam sentire humi- 
liter; ... de ista quaestione, quod ad me attinet, amplius curiosus non ero, ne maiestatem 
Dei vestigans, obscurer a lumine” (tr. Trinkaus). 


[PDF page 253]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 233 
between them. Here we see the profound cultural divide between the 
Middle Ages and the Renaissance, as well as a characteristic expression of 
how the circumstances have changed — and not only with respect to the 
exigencies of the Christian faith. 
In Article 1 of Thomas’s Question, the objector maintains the position 
that “it is not permissible to investigate divine things by the arguments of 
reason””” by citing the well-known text of Dionysius (the end of De coelesti 
hierarchia, PG 3, 340B), where a final limit to theological discourse is 
imposed in the form of absolute “silence” before the arcanum of the “mys- 
tery,” the unutterable secret of God. Aquinas’s response (ad sextum) — 
with a distinction (distinguo) that is actually made in stark opposition to 
the absolute mysticism of Dionysian “silence” — is equally clear insofar as 
it coheres perfectly with the overall theological epistemology of the 
Commentary: 
God “is honored by silence,” but not in such a way that we may say nothing 
of Him or make no inquiries about Him, but, inasmuch as we understand 
that we lack the ability to comprehend Him.!° 
Here, however, let us note immediately that whatever seems common to 
both Thomas’s statement and Valla’s exhortation is merely apparent. 
Their respective positions are actually undergirded by wholly divergent 
argumentative methodologies regarding the “secrets of faith,” methodolo- 
gies that derive from, or better are based on, vastly different epistemologi- 
cal guidelines for the study of theology. Thomas’s position presupposes 
the use of philosophy (its ethical, metaphysical, psychological, and other 
categories — Aristotelian or Neoplatonic — unfailingly articulated and 
indeed constrained and delimited by the analogical constants of quod- 
dams and quodammodos). Valla’s position, on the other hand, depends on 
the models and procedures of (Quintilian’s) rhetoric. This is what Valla 
defends and argues most explicitly in the preface to the fourth book of the 
Elegantiae, which will be the focus of analysis in the fourth part of this 
essay.!29 
127 Aquinas, Expositio super librum Boethii de Trinitate, quae. 2, art. 1: “divina investigare 
non licet argumentando’” (tr. Brennan). 
128 Tbid., quae. 2, art. 1, ad sextum: “Deus ‘honoratur silentio, non quod nihil de ipso 
dicatur vel inquiratur, sed quia quidquid de ipso dicamus vel inquiramus, intelligimus nos 
ab eius comprehensione deficisse” (tr. Brennan). 
129 On the theme of Dionysian “mystic silence,” see Salvatore I. Camporeale, Amore e 
conoscenza nell’esperienza mistica secondo lAquinate (Viterbo: Agnesotti, 1961), originally 
published in Sapienza 12 (1959): 237-271 and 13 (1960): 360-381. 


[PDF page 254]
234 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
3.2. Dialectic/Rhetoric 
“If only Boethius had preferred to devote the effort he expended 
in writing dialectical texts to reading Quintilian! He would thus 
not have made mistakes in rhetorical matters, and he would 
have become a weightier and more religious philosopher.” 
—L. Valla, De vero falsoque bono, III. 12.15-18 (var. B)!3° 
With De libero arbitrio (1438), Valla definitively completed his anti-philo- 
sophical critique of Boethius’s Consolation of Philosophy. This critique was 
begun in De voluptate (the alpha redaction of 1431), was developed gradu- 
ally and elaborated into several individual themes, and was finally con- 
centrated, the whole being nearly recapitulated in the classic problematic 
of “freedom vs. predestination,” in the writing and immediate diffusion of 
De libero arbitrio. To be sure, Valla would continue working on this topic, 
slowly moving beyond the negative phase and towards the positive elabo- 
ration of a new guideline for theology alternative to that of Boethius. At any 
rate, by 1438 he had definitively completed his critique of philosophy and 
had made his consequent demand for an alternative theology, therewith 
signaling a break with the philosophical and theological culture of scholas- 
ticism from Boethius to Thomas to the neo-Thomists of his own time. It is 
on the basis of these radical positions that Valla made his name among his 
contemporaries. He enjoyed the support of many humanists, who often 
tenaciously agreed with his new propositions. Nevertheless he was attacked 
and denounced as a “heretic” in the Invectivae (Invectives) of Poggio 
Bracciolini, an accusation leveled at him earlier in his inquisitorial trial in 
Naples in 1444 (and even by scholastics outside the Aragonese realm). 
3.2.1. Chapter 12, Book III of De vero falsoque bono: Text and Context 
Following in the scriptural footsteps of Paul (Col. 2:8), as he repeatedly 
states throughout his oeuvre (from the Epistola apologetica [Letter of 
Defense] to De professione religiosorum [On the Profession of the Religious] 
all the way to the Encomium), Valla dedicated his De voluptate and De 
libero arbitrio to a kind of damnatio philosophiae. On the one hand he con- 
demns classical philosophy in almost courtroom fashion, definitively 
180 Valla, De vero fasloque bono, 202 (Apparatus I to p. 13.15-18): “Boethius ... qui utinam 
operam quam scribendis dialecticis libris impendit, Quintiliano legendo maluisset impen- 
dere! Nam nec ita in rhetoricis errasset, et gravior et religiosior philosophus evasisset.” 


[PDF page 255]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 235 
judging it “a poisoner and murderer” (venefica et homicida). On the other 
hand, with the “praise of Quintilian” (aus Quintiliani) which he began 
declaiming in the first redaction of the Disputationes (1438/39), he turns 
his critique of philosophy into an exaltation of rhetoric.!3! Indeed, it is 
possible to pinpoint the shift from the condemnation of philosophy to the 
exaltation of rhetoric in a highly significant passage of De vero falsoque 
bono. Precious testimony of Valla’s thought, it is also a fundamental text if 
considered with a view to its variants (from one redaction to the next) and 
its references to Valla’s other writings and scholarly endeavors. 
The passage in question is a long section from chapter 12, book III of De 
vero falsoque bono: 
Thus blessedness and virtue are called ‘good,’ nevertheless the good are ulti- 
mately those who are graced with virtue, not with blessedness and happi- 
ness; here Boethius, who had a greater fondness for dialecticians than for 
rhetoricians, was deceived. But how much more suitable would it have been 
to speak rhetorically than dialectically! For what is more foolish than the 
manner of the philosophers, in which the whole case is jeopardized if an 
error is made with one word? But the orator uses many and various argu- 
ments: he adduces contraries, brings forth examples, makes comparisons, and 
forces even hidden truth to reveal itself. How wretched and poor is the mili- 
tary commander who places the whole outcome of a war in the life of one 
soldier! One must fight with all available resources, and if one soldier falls or 
if a platoon is destroyed, then now this one, now that one should immedi- 
ately be called in. This is how Boethius should have acted, who like so many 
others was ensnared by an excessive love for dialectic. But how much error was 
in dialectic, and that no one has written circumspectly about it, and that it is a 
part of rhetoric, our Lorenzo here, in my opinion, has begun to write most truly. 
But to return to our subject, hear how much better and how much more 
briefly I, relying on the authority of faith, would respond than the philoso- 
phy of Boethius. I will fear neither to dismiss nor to condemn philosophy, 
since Paul accuses her and Jerome and certain others call philosophers her- 
esiarchs. So begone! Begone, philosophy! May she, as though a common 
whore, remove her foot from the sacrosanct temple! May she cease singing 
or chattering sweetly until the point of ruin like a siren! Suffering from foul 
illnesses and multiple wounds herself, may she leave it to another doctor to 
heal and cleanse the sick! Which doctor? Me. How exactly? Like this: “Why 
are you crying? Why are you groaning, sufferer? Why do you accuse God? If 
you hope for eternal goods, why do you desire earthly ones? But if you prefer 
these earthly goods (although it is sinful), why don’t you pray to God rather 
than accusing him, he who says that he does not love lovers of earthly 
things? Thus although you deserve his punishment, you deserter, do you 
131 Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 36. 


[PDF page 256]
236 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
also damn him for not furnishing you with a reward? And will you dictate to 
him which favors he should especially grant you, as if you were wiser or 
greater than he? And although he, knowing what is to your advantage, has 
done you a favor, will you reject it and most ungratefully call his kindness an 
injury?” This is the rebuke with which those who complained about fortune 
and God ought to have been scourged. But boastful philosophy was never 
able to do this, because it did not love and worship God, despite knowing 
him or having the capacity to know him. It preferred instead to fornicate 
with the lovers of the earth.!92 
The long passage cited here is an important part of a section of De vero 
falsoque bono that received some of the most extensive revision (namely 
chapter 12 of book III). Indeed, we seem to find concentrated here the 
methodological core of Valla’s critique of “Boethian philosophy.” From an 
epistemological point of view, this critique is the objective underlying the 
entire dialogue, and it takes on clear significance within a specifically 
theological perspective, especially in book III (the long speech entrusted 
to the Franciscan Antonio da Rho). Valla shows Boethius’s argumentative 
procedure to be erroneous by demonstrating that the apodosis does not 
182 Valla, De vero falsoque bono, 13.4—38: “Ita cum ‘bonum’ beatitudo dicatur et virtus 
boni tamen ii demum sunt qui virtute affecti sunt non qui felicitate et beatitudine, in quo 
Boethius dialecticorum quam rhetoricorum amantior deceptus est. At quanto satius erat 
oratorie quam dialectice loqui! Quid enim ineptius philosophorum more ut si uno verbo sit 
erratum tota causa periclitetur? At orator multis et variis rationibus utitur, affert contraria, 
exempla repetit, similitudines comparat et cogit etiam latitantem prodire veritatem. Quam 
miser ac pauper imperator est qui omnem fortunam belli in anima unius militis ponit! 
Universitate pugnandum est et si quis miles concidit aut si qua turma profligata est, alia 
subinde atque alia sufficienda. Hoc modo agendum Boethio erat, qui ut plurimi alii nimio 
amore dialectice deceptus est. At quantus in ea error fuerit et quod nemo de illa sobrie scrip- 
serit et eadem rhetorice pars sit hic noster Laurentius scribere instituit meo iudicio verissime. 
Sed ut ad rem redeam, audite quanto melius quantoque brevius ipse quam boethiana phi- 
losophia respondeam nixus fidei auctoritate. Non verebor philosophiam aut contemnere 
aut damnare, cum Paulus eam arguat et Hieronymus cum quibusdam aliis philosophos 
heresiarchas appellent. Valeat igitur, valeat philosophia et a sacrosancta ede velut scenica 
meretricula pedem effereat et sirena usque in exitium dulcis cantare seu garrire desinat et 
morbis ipsa fedis ac plurimis affecta vulneribus egros alii curandos sanandosque medico 
relinquat! Cui medico? Mihi. Quonam modo? Certe ita: ‘Quid fles? Quid gemis eger? Quid 
Deum incusas? Si expectas bona eterna, quid terrena desideras? Sin hec terrena malles, 
licet prave, quin Deum potius deprecaris quam incusas, qui se dicit amatores non amare 
terrenos? Itane cum a domino supplicium meritus sis, fugitive, etiam illi quod te non afficit 
premio maledicis? Etiam illi prescribes que in te beneficia potissimum conferat, tanquam 
tu sis illo aut sapientior aut maior? Etiam cum tibi beneficium prestiterit, sciens quid tibi 
sit conducibile, non agnosces, sed benignitatem ingratissime iniuriam appellabis? Hac 
omnes qui de fortuna ac Deo querebantur erant increpatione verberandi; quod nunquam 
philosophia vaniloqua facere potuit quia Deum non dilexit ac coluit, cum vel cognosceret 
illum vel posset cognoscere, malens fornicari cum amatoribus terre” (emphasis added; the 
translation of Hieatt and Lorch in Valla, On Pleasure has been consulted). 


[PDF page 257]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 237 
follow, as there is a rupture between the unicity of the deductions’ formal 
correctness and the natural polysemy of language (ambiguitas verbi). This 
rupture can be mended if and only if the argumentative procedure con- 
joins within itself formal dialectical correctness with a rhetorical analysis 
of language. This indissoluble nexus between procedure and analysis in 
argumentative discourse would be one of the central themes of the 
Dialecticae disputationes; there Valla fully treats the relationship between 
logical formalization and the semantic analysis of language, from collo- 
quial and discursive language to the scientific and apodictic.!33 
The immediate consequence of Valla’s critique of “Boethian philoso- 
phy’ is for dialectic to be reduced to an integral part of rhetoric. Thus on 
the one hand Valla places the logical formalization of argumentation 
within the rhetorical analysis (methodological and historical) of language. 
On the other he takes up the rhetoric of Quintilian’s Institutio oratoria as 
an epistemological guideline. The second consequence, specific to the 
context, is that explicit emphasis is placed on the insoluble antinomy, 
the insurmountable antithesis, between Boethian philosophy and moral 
theology. Hence the decisive methodological decision: the theological 
argument on Christian virtue (virtus) and blessedness, or happiness 
(beatitudo) — pronounced in book III by Antonio da Rho as the solution to 
the ethico-theological problem of pleasure (voluptas) posed by the dia- 
logue — is conducted by Valla on the epistemological foundation of 
Quintilian’s rhetoric. 
It can therefore be concluded that chapter 12 of book III, since it 
expresses the methodological premise of the entire work, provides the 
principle for interpreting De vero falsoque bono and for understanding its 
meaning and contents. This applies both to its scrutiny of the grand ethi- 
cal systems of Greco-Hellenistic antiquity (Stoicism, Epicureanism, and 
Aristotelianism) and to its explicit recourse to the foundational character- 
istics of early Christian praxis in the service of creating an alternative to 
the Boethian, scholastic basis of theology. 
The preceding observations on chapter 12, book III of De vero ... bono 
must now be circumscribed and brought into greater relief by focusing on 
one of the most significant variants that entered the above-cited passage 
in the process of revision from the dialogue’s second to its third version. It 
will first be necessary, however, to prefix an excursus collecting a series of 
(in our opinion) essential observations on the chronology of Valla’s famous 
133 Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 146-192; Gerl, Rhetorik als 
Philosophie, 191-231. 


[PDF page 258]
238 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
work that indicate the stages of its transformation from one revision to the 
next. Unfortunately, this issue is extremely complicated and has not, as far 
as we are concerned, been definitively resolved by Lorch’s critical edition 
of 1970 — and this despite her insightful introduction to the text. It will 
therefore be necessary to pass over issues marginal to the chronological 
sequence of the dialogue’s various drafts and revisions and to reduce 
Lorch’s complex solution, for use as a working hypothesis, to a rather sim- 
plified outline. 
3.2.2. The Editorial Evolution of the alpha, beta, and gamma Versions of 
De vero falsoque bono and De Panizza Lorch’s Edition: Chronological 
Correlations between the gamma Redaction and the First Version of the 
Dialecticae disputationes, and the Impact of Valla’s Inquisitorial Trial 
(1444) on His Work 
Lorch established the following stages in the editorial evolution of Valla’s 
dialogue. There are ultimately four versions of De vero falsoque bono, with 
variant titles and continual expansion of the text: de voluptate (on plea- 
sure), de vero bono (on the true good), de vero falsoque bono (on the true 
and false good). The first two are: the alpha redaction of 1431 (often called 
the “Rome-Piacenza’ version, referring to Valla’s geographical location at 
the time of writing) and the beta redaction of 1433 (a revision of alpha, 
finished during Valla’s incomplete two-year teaching stint at Pavia, edited 
at Milan, and known as the “Pavia-Milan” version). Valla’s work undergoes 
a clean temporal and qualitative break in its third redaction, gamma. 
A profound and complex revision of beta, it is to be placed in the period of 
Valla’s residence at the court of Alfonso the Magnanimous, from 1435 to 
1448. More precisely, Lorch hypothesizes that the gamma revision belongs 
to ca. 1444 or, at the latest, 1449. Finally, the fourth and last version of the 
work is delta. This is the definitive redaction, consisting in a further revi- 
sion of the gamma text that is purely formal and stylistic. From what Lorch 
writes, and according to the dating established for gamma (1444 or 1449), 
it seems possible to infer that Valla completed the delta redaction in the 
final years of his Neapolitan period, ca. 1447-1448, or at a time (immedi- 
ately?) succeeding his move to Rome (the end of 1448), where he joined 
the curia of the newly elected Nicholas V. Valla would serve the papal 
court until his death in 1457, first under Nicholas V and then Callixtus III. 
Since the revision of gamma to delta was, as has been said, mostly stylistic 
and did not affect the central contents, Lorch combines both versions of 
Valla’s dialogue into one single redaction, thus taking the Neapolitan (or 


[PDF page 259]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 239 
Roman) gamma-delta phase as constitutive of a final and definitive text 
on which to base a critical edition of De vero falsoque bono. In Lorch’s own 
words: 
The text of the present edition is the text of the last version of the dialogue 
delta. However, since the version delta is a slight revision of gamma and 
since it is represented by one manuscript only, V [BAV, Ott. lat. 2075], and 
this manuscript has numerous errors and omissions, we have proceeded to 
correct the errors and fill the omissions with the help of the manuscript P 
[Paris, Bibl. Nat., Lat. 6471], authoritative representative of the third version 
of the dialogue gamma. Stylistic variants between gamma and delta are, 
generally speaking, insignificant.154 
This is a summary of the chronological succession of the various redac- 
tions of Valla’s dialogue as amply reconstructed by Lorch in her critical 
edition. It must nevertheless be noted that, although the broad outline is 
valid, the chronological relationship between the Neapolitan revision 
of De vero falsoque bono and Valla’s overall literary production during 
his years at the Aragonese court (1435-48) remains unclear. This prob- 
lem must be confronted when trying to achieve precision with regard 
to the various phases of revision of De vero falsoque bono, both from 
a chronological point of view and for understanding the dialogue’s con- 
tents in the context of Valla’s broader humanistic and theological work. 
In particular — and at issue here is the passage cited above from chapter 12, 
book III of the dialogue — Lorch seems to fall into contradiction concern- 
ing the chronological nexus between the dating of the gamma revision of 
De vero falsoque bono and the composition (first version) of the Dialecticae 
disputationes. She retains 1438/39 as the date of the Dialecticae disputatio- 
nes (first version), which is generally accepted and which, we believe, 
ought to be considered approximately correct. Then, she maintains that 
the gamma revision of De vero falsoque bono was “completed by 1444 or 
by 1449 at the latest.” Finally, and despite what has been said so far, she 
explicitly states that the gamma version of the dialogue “was composed by 
Valla while he was working at the Dialectica.”!%° 
This last statement is based on what is said in the long passage cited 
above from chapter 12, book III of the dialogue, where the interlocutor 
Antonio da Rho emphatically refers to Valla’s Dialecticae disputationes. 
Indeed, the reference is explicit and leaves no room for doubt: 
134 Jn Valla, De vero falsoque bono, \xxv. 
135 For the three issues of dating traced here, see ibid., lxx, li, and xlix, respectively. 


[PDF page 260]
240 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
This is how Boethius should have acted, who like so many others was 
ensnared by an excessive love for dialectic. But how much error was in dialec- 
tic, and that no one has written circumspectly about it, and that it is a part of 
rhetoric, our Lorenzo here, in my opinion, has begun to write most truly. 
(emphasis added) 
A basic reading of this passage and the context in which it occurs would 
certainly suggest that the gamma redaction of De vero falsoque bono was 
composed at the same time as (the first version of) the Dialecticae disputa- 
tiones — the very conclusion reached by Lorch. 
Nevertheless, the force and the significance of the mention made of the 
Disputationes in the dialogue transcend that of a simple chronological ref- 
erence. Indeed, only by considering the larger theoretical import of the 
statement made by Antonio da Rho (the main speaker in book III) can its 
meaning be understood for the interpretation of the text. Thus while 
accepting Lorch’s sketch of the evolution of Valla’s dialogue as the most 
likely hypothesis, we would be inclined to move the chronological con- 
fines of the gamma redaction to the period (immediately) following 1444. 
The general reasons and the particular textual analysis that induce us to 
correct, or better, to refine the editorial phase of the gamma (and then the 
delta) version can be encapsulated in the following points. 
First, it seems necessary to repeat here something we have had occa- 
sion to note elsewhere: 1444 — the year of the inquisitorial trial held in 
Naples against Valla — must not be considered solely as one biographical 
fact or incident, important as it may be, among the various affairs and 
complex situations that dot the humanist’s life. Instead it marks a turn, or 
at the least it was a decisive moment, in Valla’s cultural development, 
which was starkly characterized by tenacious dissent and by a radical crit- 
icism of both the scholastic tradition and of contemporary Ciceronianism. 
The inquisitorial trial had defining repercussions for and notable impacts 
on Valla’s successive literary production. It gives us the opportunity to 
mark a biographico-cultural caesura in his residence at Alfonso of Aragon’s 
court: between an early period (from 1435 to 1444) and a late one (com- 
prising the final years of service to Alfonso, until Valla’s return to Rome in 
1448/49 and his definitive transfer to Nicholas V’s curia). This distinction 
between the two periods, split by the year of the inquisitorial trial, is made 
with a view to the following two objectives: on the one hand, to under- 
stand more adequately, even if only approximately, the fluctuations that 
occurred in Valla’s personal position in the Neapolitan chancery between 
the years before 1444 and the period following the trial; on the other hand, 
to establish a basis for grasping more precisely the developments and 


[PDF page 261]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 241 
relative meanings of Valla’s work and writings between an early phase of 
original composition (from 1435 to 1444) and a later one (from 1444 on) in 
which he revised and reworked his major writings. This later, more reflec- 
tive phase is both longer and more profound, above all on account of the 
greater and more direct access Valla had to ancient and modern sources in 
his final decade at the papal curia in Rome. 
Now, it emerges clearly from the list of writings composed during the 
early Neapolitan period (1435-1444) that those years constitute the most 
intense decade of Valla’s literary production, not only in a quantitative 
sense but also, and above all, in that they witnessed the full and systematic 
literary formulation of his early intuition of Quintilian’s importance (the 
discovery of the Institutio oratoria, which led to the Comparatio Ciceronis 
Quintilianique in 1428). In fact, Valla’s radical Quintilianism (i.e., his con- 
ception of rhetoric as a critical theory of language and an epistemological 
guideline for scholarship) takes on systematic form — beyond that of the 
minor dialogues De libero arbitrio and De professione religiosorum — par- 
ticularly in the major writings of a prevailingly (although not exclusively) 
methodological character, especially the Dialecticae disputationes 
(1438/39), the Declamatio on the Donation of Constantine (1440), the 
Collatio Novi Testamenti (Collation of the New Testament) (1443), and the 
Elegantiae (ca. 1441-1448), Valla’s longest and one of his most laborious 
works. This list is not complete, but it certainly demonstrates the fact that 
between 1435 and 1444 Valla deployed the full range of complex philologi- 
cal and categorical tools derived from Quintilian’s Institutio — and in all 
different kinds of scholarship, including linguistic, philosophical, biblical, 
theological, juridical, and ecclesiological. Informed by this analytical 
principle and situated within this perspective, the first redactions of 
the Disputationes, the Elegantiae, and the New-Testament Adnotationes 
emerge as systematic compositions with all the pregnancy, only recently 
apprehended but fully conscious, of the rediscovery of new horizons and 
unexpected potentialities. From the trial of 1444 to his death in 1457, Valla 
would continually revise and amplify the initial versions of these writings, 
supplementing them with greater evidence and heightened precision. 
Even now we lack comprehensive, i.e. analytical and comparative, stud- 
ies of the contents of these various versions, of the theoretical and chrono- 
logical differences that arose among them due to textual changes and the 
influence of historico-cultural factors. Thus it is impossible at this point to 
trace a complete and sufficiently detailed outline of the editorial revisions 
that began with the late Neapolitan period and ended with the Roman 
years at Nicholas V’s curia. And yet the significance of the textual changes 


[PDF page 262]
242 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
and the critical aims represented by those editorial revisions has already 
proved revealing and incisive in the one particular case where successive 
versions have been studied, namely with the Dialecticae disputationes. 
Indeed, the comparison of the first redaction of the Disputationes (1438/39) 
with the second and the third, to be placed respectively at the close of the 
late Neapolitan period and the final years of the Roman decade, has led to 
two conclusions of great importance for understanding the historico-cul- 
tural place of Valla’s humanism. 
The first conclusion concerns the significance of the inquisitorial trial 
of 1444 and the dimensions that it eventually took on. It was not only a 
specific reaction on the part of current scholasticism to Valla’s theses, 
namely his critique of logical and metaphysical Aristotelianism, and his 
patristic renewal of rhetorical theology by means of a systematic deploy- 
ment of philology and Quintilian’s categorical schematics. Actually, the 
trial (to which Valla reacted with his Apologia ad papam Eugenium IV 
[Apology to Pope Eugenius IV] of 1445) turned out to be the reactionary 
counterpart of a simultaneous conservative counter-critique, more com- 
plex and thus more significant, hailing from humanist circles with 
Ciceronian leanings. This other, humanist “trial” was geographically much 
more diffuse and ideologically much more profound. Also begun within 
the Aragonese chancery itself, by Bartolomeo Facio and Panormita, it was 
prosecuted to the full as a veritable Kulturkampf by Poggio Bracciolini in 
his Invectivae against Valla (1452-1454) and in related letters. Poggio had 
fully understood from the very beginning the nature of the shift that Valla 
and his followers were effecting within humanist culture. In his Invectivae, 
he took up and sharpened nearly all of the essential elements of the 
polemic against Valla that had already converged in Facio’s writings in 
Naples and that had thenceforth ricocheted in humanist circles through- 
out central and northern Italy. Valla was gradually induced, indeed con- 
strained, to undertake and devote increasing energy to a systematic 
self-defense (going well beyond the appeal to Eugenius IV). This he pro- 
duced in his Invectivae in Facium (Invectives against Facio) of 1447 and his 
Antidota in Pogium of 1452/53. Here we might observe, with reference to 
the general theme of this essay, that in the Encomium of 1457 Valla would 
ultimately take what had initially been two lines of defense against his 
accusers, gradually developed and elaborated in the Apologia to Eugenius 
(against the scholastic tradition) and the Antidota in Pogium (in opposi- 
tion to the “old school” of early humanism), and fuse them into a single 
proposition for theological renewal (renovatio). 


[PDF page 263]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 243 
The other conclusion evinced from a comparative and contextual anal- 
ysis of the editorial stages of the Dialecticae disputationes brings us to a 
precise understanding of the work’s purpose. A comprehensive epistemo- 
logical criticism of scholastic dialectic and philosophy, the Disputationes 
is the fullest and most systematic attempt to refound the arts and sciences 
in rhetoric. On the one hand, it proceeds organically to a philological and 
gnoseological analysis of the linguistic and conceptual foundations of 
scholastic metaphysics and logic (a critical examination of the predica- 
ments and the predicables, of propositional and syllogistic structures). On 
the other hand, it effects a radical reduction of all language-based issues in 
philosophy and theology to the epistemological guideline of Quintilian’s 
rhetoric. The Disputationes would ultimately act in three ways: as a syn- 
thesis of all of Valla’s work to date (from the methodological plane in gen- 
eral to that of individual problems at various levels); as a mature literary 
formulation of principles and models for use in ulterior investigation in 
the most diverse areas (in syntactics and semantics, for example, with the 
Elegantiae, or in biblical exegesis, as in the Collatio/Adnotationes); and 
finally as a theoretical innovation that necessitated the review and revi- 
sion of youthful writings (the case of De vero falsoque bono). Once again, 
the most telling evidence that such was the import of the Disputationes’ 
theoretical and functional premise is found in Valla’s trial itself, at which 
the inquisitorial reaction of contemporary scholasticism converged with 
criticism from the distant camp of contemporary Ciceronian humanism. 
What is more, this concentration of opposition to Valla helps to locate 
more precisely the time frame in which the theoretical proposition encap- 
sulated in the Disputationes emerged. It seems clear — both from the rea- 
sons behind the inquisitorial condemnation of 1444 and from the polemics 
of Facio and Bracciolini — that the origin of the opposition to Valla’s cri- 
tique coincided in time and substance with the diffusion of the 
Disputationes, i.e. in 1439/40. We therefore believe it possible to conclude 
(although further and more precise documentation must still be adduced) 
that the first version (1438/39) of the Disputationes actually constitutes a 
turn in the trajectory of scholastic and humanist culture in early fifteenth- 
century Italy. Furthermore, within Valla’s oeuvre, this same first version 
acts almost as a dividing line between the work he did before the early 
Neapolitan period and that following the inquisitorial trial of 1444. 
The preceding considerations on the context of the chronological and 
biographical nexuses of the period spanning 1435-1444, as well as on 
the significance of this decade’s theoretical innovations and literary 


[PDF page 264]
244 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
output, enable a more precise evaluation of Valla’s cultural activity in his 
early Neapolitan phase. In particular, we can now better approach the 
question whether — as Lorch believes — the gamma revision of De vero 
falsoque bono (third redaction) was composed at the same time as the 
Dialecticae disputationes (first version). This is the problem to which this 
excursus has been devoted, in the hope that its solution will aid in prop- 
erly interpreting the long passage cited from chapter 12, book III of De vero 
falsoque bono. 
To circumscribe with greater precision the realm of possible solutions, 
it should be noted straightaway that there is no reason not to believe that 
the gamma revision of the dialogue was begun even before the inquisito- 
rial trial (April, 1444), and thus that it coincided with the definitive draft 
(of the first version) of the Disputationes. This would resolve some of the 
inconsistency in the ambiguous contemporaneity that Lorch posits 
between the two writings. For on the one hand she retains as certain (and 
justly so) the date of 1438/39 for the (finished) draft of the Disputationes, 
and on the other she argues for “1444 or at the latest 1449” as the date for 
the gamma redaction of the dialogue. Still, in order to resolve this incon- 
sistency fully, a new view must be proposed of the chronological succes- 
sion of Valla’s two works and of the relationship between them. We do so 
in the following terms. 
Conceding that the gamma redaction of the dialogue was begun before 
1444 (as in fact seems quite likely), in terms of strict chronology and in the 
sense of a completed and polished revision of all its parts, this version of 
the work must nevertheless be placed after the trial, in the late Neapolitan 
period, from 1445/46 to 1448. These are the years in which the insurgent 
humanist criticisms and the inquisitorial judgment of April, 1444 had 
profound repercussions for Valla’s cultural activity and heavily impacted 
his literary production. But a more important and decisive fact must be 
highlighted, one that closes and, we believe, resolves the matter at hand. 
Beyond the editorial evolution of De vero falsoque bono and the Dispu- 
tationes and the chronological interrelations between the two writings, 
the most important and essential element for adequately understanding 
the timeline and the development of Valla’s work consists in the profound 
impact that the Disputationes would have on the gamma revision of De 
vero falsoque bono itself. The precise timing and the extent of the textual 
interrelations between the gamma revision of the dialogue and the com- 
position of the Disputationes will have to be the subject of a future study. 
For now, the essential point is to place the Disputationes (of 1438/39) at the 
(theoretical and editorial) origins of Valla’s entire production from the 


[PDF page 265]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 245 
1440s onward, and especially of the gamma revision of De vero falsoque 
bono.'6 
3.2.3. The beta-gamma Variant in Chapter 12, Book III of De vero falsoque 
bono, the “Quintilianism” of the Dialecticae disputationes, and the Critique 
of Boethius: Speaking Dialectically vs. Speaking Rhetorically 
Having completed our excursus through the complicated interweaving of 
positive and negative influences in the broadening of scope, the drafts and 
revisions, and the critical reactions and condemnations that make up the 
context in which the Dialecticae disputationes and the gamma version of 
De vero falsoque bono were composed, we can now return to the interpre- 
tation of the long passage cited above, from chapter 12, book III of Valla’s 
dialogue. The reference it contains to the writing of the Disputationes 
(“that [dialectic] is a part of rhetoric, our Lorenzo here has begun to 
write”) now takes on broader and undoubtedly more significant dimen- 
sions. Actually, this passage is an editorial variant of gamma differing from 
the preceding beta redaction of the dialogue, and it provides us with a 
retrospective look at the distance separating the gamma version, poste- 
rior to the trial of 1444, from the beta (“Pavia”) version of 1433 — a shift in 
time and context whose discontinuity is strongly marked by the 
Disputationes of 1438/39. Let us now compare the texts in order to re- 
evaluate the editorial variant in question: 
De vero falsoque bono 
ch. 12, bk. II 
gamma beta 
This is how Boethius should have 
acted, who like so many others was 
ensnared by an excessive love for 
dialectic. But how much error was in 
dialectic, and that no one has written 
circumspectly about it, and that it 
is a part of rhetoric, our Lorenzo 
here, in my opinion, has begun to 
This is how Boethius should have 
acted. If only he had preferred to 
devote the effort he expended in 
writing dialectical texts to reading 
Quintilian! He would thus not 
have made mistakes in rhetorical 
matters, and he would have become 
a weightier and more religious 
136 This is the thesis that underlies the whole of ch. 1 of Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. 
Umanesimo e teologia, esp. 33-87, and is treated explicitly in other parts of the same work. 
But see also Di Napoli, Lorenzo Valla, 57-99. 


[PDF page 266]
246 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
write most truly. But to return to our philosopher. But to return to our 
subjecteni24 subject ....138 
Let us first consider the initial part of chapter 12, book III of the dialogue, 
which directly precedes the long passage (including the editorial variant 
in question) cited above. In this way we will be able to reconstruct in full 
the extensive critique of Boethius that Valla elaborates in this important 
chapter, clarifying its rationale and identifying the alternative solutions 
proposed in its final sentences. 
According to Valla, Boethius argued in book IV of The Consolation of 
Philosophy that good men always possess the true good (verum bonum) 
while evil ones lack it utterly, thus identifying the true good with upright 
behavior and the integrity of moral virtue (honestas). Now, “to say what I 
think of him,” Valla continues in the guise of Antonio da Rho, 
begging the pardon of a man so learned in every area of study, he called in 
philosophy as his patroness and bestowed upon her almost greater honor 
than on our religion, and thus he did not resolve the question, nor did he 
demonstrate what the true good is.!%9 
Thereupon follow Valla’s counter-arguments to Boethius’s thesis: “virtue 
is not actually the ‘highest good,’ nor are the evil always wretched or the 
good always happy.”!*° On the contrary, the good often find themselves 
surrounded by misery while the evil enjoy well-being and happiness: “the 
evil are not necessarily wretched in this life, but in the next; and the just 
are not blessed in the present time, but they will be in the future.”#! Then 
Boethius’s error is revealed, namely a linguistic ambiguity hidden in the 
parasyllogistic reasoning of his dialectic: 
187 Valla, De vero falsoque bono, 113.15—18: “Hoc modo agendum Boethio erat, qui ut plu- 
rimi alti nimio amore dialectice deceptus est. At quantus in ea error fuerit et quod nemo de illa 
sobrie scripserit et eadem rhetorice pars sit hic noster Laurentjus scribere instituit meo iudicio 
verissime. Sed ut ad rem redeam ...” (emphasis added). 
188 Tbid., 202, App. I to p. 13: “Hoc modo agendum Boethio erat, qui utinam operam 
quam scribendis dialecticis libris impendit, Quintiliano legendo maluisset impendere! Nam 
nec ita in rhetoricis errasset et gravior et religiosior philosophus evasisset. Sed ut ad rem 
redeam ...” (emphasis added). 
189  Ibid., 12.6—g: “De quo ut dicam quod sentio, pace viri in omni doctrina peritissimi, 
quia patronam philosophiam advocavit et ei propemodum maiorem honorem quam nos- 
tre religioni tribuit, illi cause non satisfecit nec quid sit verum bonum probavit.” 
140 Tbid., 12.9—10: “Non enim virtus est summum bonum, nec malos semper miseros nec 
bonos semper felices.” 
41 Tbid., 112.12-14: “Iniqui nanque non in hac utique vita miseri sunt sed in futura, et 
justi non nunc beati sed postea erunt.” 


[PDF page 267]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 247 
who would believe that so careful and sharp, not to say elegant, a man fell 
into this kind of error out of ignorance of one word, and such an easy one at 
that? For good (bonum) is said ... both of virtue and of happiness, just as evil 
(malum) is said of their opposites. But virtue and vice are actions (actiones), 
whereas happiness and unhappiness are qualities (qualitates) — things very 
different from one another in the effect that they produce.42 
Boethius’s reasoning is thus reducible to the following form: 
Whoever is good has the good, 
the good is blessedness 
therefore every good man is blessed.!43 
But this reasoning, Valla observes, can be easily refuted. In the syllogism’s 
major premise, what is meant by “the good” (bonum)? Does it mean the 
good of happiness (bonum felicitatis)? Then the statement must be denied, 
for no one is called good because he is happy but because he is virtuous 
(virtute praeditus). Does it mean the good of virtue (bonum virtutis)? Then 
the reasoning remains completely valid, but it will be necessary to refor- 
mulate the argument in the following way: 
Whoever is good has the good, 
the good is virtue, 
therefore every good man is virtuous.!4 
Valla notes that where Boethius errs, Cicero did not, namely in the 
Tusculan Disputations (1 5,9), where he treated exactly the same question 
using the same terminology: “this linguistic ambiguity did not dupe 
Cicero.”!45 Valla concludes: 
although ‘blessedness’ and ‘virtue’ are called good, nevertheless the good are 
ultimately those who are graced with ‘virtue,’ not with ‘happiness’ and 
‘blessedness’; here Boethius, who had a greater fondness for dialecticians 
than for rhetoricians, was deceived.!*6 
142 Tbid., 112.17-23: “Quis crederet virum ita diligentem et acutum, taceo elegantem, in 
huiusmodi errorem propter ignorationem unius verbi, et quidem facillimi devenisse? Nam 
‘bonum’ ... tum ‘virtutum’ tum ‘felicitatem’ dicimus, sicut e contrario ‘malum.’ At virtus 
quidem et vitium actiones sunt, felicitas vero atque infelicitas qualitates, res etiam effectu 
ipso inter se longissime distantes.” 
143 Tbid., 12.32—33: “quicunque est bonus is habet bonum, bonum autem est beatitudo, 
ergo omnis bonus beatus.” 
144 Tbid., 112.3738: “quicunque est bonus is habet bonum, bonum autem est virtus, ergo 
omnis bonus, virtute praeditus.” 
145 [bid., 12.38—39: “non Ciceronem fefellit ista verbi ambiguitas.” 
146 [bid., 13.4-7: “Ita cum ‘bonum’ beatitudo dicatur et virtus, boni tamen ii demum 
sunt qui virtute affecti sunt non qui felicitate et beatitudine; in quo Boethius dialecticorum 
quam rhetoricorum amantior deceptus est.” 


[PDF page 268]
248 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Let us not be fooled by the apparent simplicity of Valla’s refutation 
(regardless of the validity of his proposed interpretation of Boethius). 
A comparison of the various editorial phases from alpha to delta, 
whose variants are collected by Lorch in the introduction to her critical 
edition, shows that this was one of the sections of book III that Valla tin- 
kered with most each time he revised the dialogue. Furthermore, here 
Valla applies a principle which was fundamental to his attack on philoso- 
phy and on which he insists in his analysis of syllogistic procedure and 
metaphysical language. 
Valla’s principle, which represented a paradigmatic turning point for 
the humanism of his time, is given in nuce in the following definition: the 
semantic polyvalence of certain words (transcendentals, predicaments, 
and predicables) must be subjected to a linguistic hermeneutics that (1) 
effects a reduction of philosophical categories, and (2) shows the invalid- 
ity of argumentative procedures that are correct from the formal point of 
view of syllogism but inexact in the morphological and signifying struc- 
ture specific to the language being used. To the latter aspect of the prob- 
lem Valla would dedicate important pages (these, too, gradually reworked) 
in book III of the Disputationes, a section that is more than explicit in the 
very form of its title: “certain words yield a manifold and multiple syllo- 
gism.”4” Moreover, one of the cases considered there is precisely the syl- 
logism of Boethius examined in chapter 12, book III of De vero falsoque 
bono — the very text currently under consideration. Valla himself directs 
the reader from the pages of the Disputationes to this passage of the dia- 
logue (obviously in the beta version, not gamma). And his interweaving of 
the critique of Boethius, froma purely formal analysis (in the Disputationes) 
to a specifically textual one (in De vero falsoque bono), is certainly worthy 
of especial emphasis; indeed, it reveals the organic nature of Valla’s work. 
Boethius, then, “had a greater fondness for dialecticians than for rheto- 
ricians.” But the opposition between dialectic and rhetoric is made even 
more explicit as Valla’s critique proceeds. The antinomy between the two 
disciplines is taken up generally, beyond the specific case in question, in 
the interest of displacing philosophy and formulating an alternative argu- 
mentative procedure. Therefore, the apparatus and the epistemological 
foundation, the hermeneutical hinge, of inquiry ends up being no longer 
logic, the scholastic art of arts (ars artium), but rhetoric, humanism’s art of 
47 [The title of book III, chapter 11. See Lorenzo Valla, Repastinatio dialectice et philoso- 
phie, ed. Gianni Zippel, 2 vols. (Padova: Antenore, 1982), 1:304:] “Quaedam verba reddere 
numerosum ac multiplicem sillogismum’ (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 269]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 249 
arts. Boethius, Valla continues, was fooled because he preferred to “speak 
dialectically (loqui dialectice) rather than rhetorically (loqui oratorie).” But, 
the humanist adds, the “manner of the philosophers” easily leads into 
error. For words crop up now and then like rocks to dash the most con- 
vincing and sturdiest argumentative structures, such that “the whole case 
is jeopardized if an error is made with one word.”#48 
The contrast, or rather the difference, between speaking dialectically 
and speaking rhetorically is specified even further when the argumenta- 
tive principles proper to rhetoric are identified: “the orator uses many and 
various arguments: he adduces contraries, brings forth examples, makes 
comparisons” (emphasis added). Rhetorical discourse, in other words, 
comprehends broader and more highly differentiated structures than log- 
ical or dialectical discourse does. It is not restricted but rather operates 
with more complex and articulated reasoning procedures, such as enthy- 
memic demonstration (e.g., ex repugnantibus) and paradigmatic argu- 
ment. This will be treated in Valla’s Disputationes, especially in books II 
and III, whose final chapters, it might be added, contain some of his dens- 
est writing, taken verbatim from Quintilian’s Institutio (bk. V, chs. 8-11). 
Valla continues: by means of procedures like adducing contraries 
(afferre contraria), bringing forth examples (repetere exempla), and mak- 
ing comparisons (comparare similitudines) — articulated and differenti- 
ated variously but directed towards the same objective — rhetorical 
argumentation investigates reality “and forces even hidden truth to reveal 
itself.” Hence the comparison, which recurs in Valla’s writings when he 
deals with argumentative method, between demonstrative procedure and 
forms of military operation. For the conquest of truth is achieved with a 
strategy no less complex than that deployed by a military commander 
(imperator) and his army to bend the will of the enemy and definitively 
conquer him. It was therefore this kind of logistics that Boethius should 
have taken up and investigated further for his own use: “this is how 
Boethius should have acted.” 
It is at this point that the comparative reading of the beta and gamma 
versions of the text aids in clarifying Valla’s critique of Boethius. The tex- 
tual variant between beta and gamma — quoted en face above (pp. 245- 
246) — opens a passageway right into the interior of the critique, giving 
insight into its various phases and developments. In the beta redaction, 
148 [For these and subsequent quotations of chapter 12, book III of De vero falsoque 
bono, consult n. 132 above. ] 


[PDF page 270]
250 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Valla rebukes Boethius above all for devoting himself excessively to dialec- 
tic and neglecting rhetoric. This first criticism of Boethius’s work must be 
traced to Valla’s peculiar vision of scholasticism. For he was struck by how 
forcefully Boethius’s logical writings influenced medieval culture and 
scholastic theology itself. But there is something more important in his 
critique of Boethius. Valla was certainly aware that Boethius had read and 
studied Cicero’s rhetorical works; he therefore had to substantiate his crit- 
icism in such a way as to implicate all of Boethius’s rhetorical and philo- 
sophical writings in the criticism of his dialectics. Hence the fact that the 
ultimate cause of the polemic against Boethius must be sought in Valla’s 
anti-Ciceronianism, or better, in the absolute primacy he accorded to 
Quintilian’s Institutio oratoria. This is what Valla underlines here in no 
uncertain terms: “If only he had preferred to devote the effort ... to reading 
Quintilian.” What follows is even more explicit: “He would thus not have 
made mistakes in rhetorical matters, and he would have become a 
weightier and more religious philosopher.” Thus Boethius not only 
subordinated rhetoric to dialectic, but he also failed to grasp the dimen- 
sion Quintilian added to rhetoric. That is to say, he remained within a tra- 
dition that left ample room for the dichotomy between rhetoric and 
dialectic and accorded the latter a primacy and autonomy that it did not 
deserve. Furthermore, by admitting that dichotomy and rejecting rhetoric 
in the sense conceived by Quintilian —- as a universal and organic 
“science of language” — Boethian philosophy exhausted itself in the for- 
malism of dialectic (and in the logicism of scholasticism). At the same 
time, it kept itself from being used in a way that was more valid and 
more consonant with the Christian religion than the Aristotelian Organon 
(and the Aristotelianism of scholasticism) had been. In short, we have 
here in nuce the motive force behind the full range of the critique of 
Boethius, to which Valla devoted the three books of De vero falsoque bono 
and De libero arbitrio. 
With the gamma redaction, Valla switched to a new (and definitive) 
formulation of his critique of Boethius. The purely negative assessment 
and rejection of Boethian dialectic was replaced by the positive and the- 
matic statement on the nature and validity of Quintilian’s rhetoric. 
Boethius erred — as Valla continues in the gamma redaction — by letting 
himself be seduced, “like so many others,” by the procedures of peripatetic 
logic: “he was ensnared by an excessive love for dialectic.” That was the 
source of formal and substantive errors which it was necessary to oppose 
with a new conception of rhetoric, one that at the same time would assign 
the art of dialectic a more precise and valid place. 


[PDF page 271]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 251 
But at this point Valla inserts another element into the variant. He had 
already completed the literary work in which he overcame the antinomy 
between rhetoric and dialectic. Therefore, he no longer needed to make 
explicit and direct reference to Quintilian’s classic work and could instead 
mention his own brand-new Dialecticae disputationes, his “retrenching of 
all dialectic and philosophy” (repastinatio totius dialecticae et philoso- 
phiae). The aim of that work was (in addition to a constant, continuous 
critique of Boethius’s writings) to re-assign logic a place within rhetorical 
discourse and to effect a radical reduction of philosophy to rhetoric, all in 
accord with the formal and categorical principles of the Institutio oratoria. 
With the Disputationes, then, the new treatment (retractatio) of scholas- 
tic, Boethian, and contemporary logic reaches its final and definitive form. 
What is more, Quintilian’s thesis, which constitutes the central theme of 
the work, is clearly enunciated: that dialectic is a part of rhetoric.!*9 
3.2.4. The damnatio philosophiae and the Reference to Jerome’s Letter to 
Ctesiphon 
The variant reading between gamma and beta marks, in a most incisive 
and explicit way, the distance in time and substance separating the two 
editions of De vero falsoque bono. As for the question of whether the refer- 
ence to the Disputationes contained in the gamma variant — “But how 
much error was in dialectic, and that no one has written circumspectly 
about it, and that it is a part of rhetoric, our Lorenzo here, in my opinion, 
has begun to write most truly” — should be seen as a reference to an unfin- 
ished composition or to one that was final and definitive in all its parts, 
this remains a marginal problem, especially as concerns the essential lines 
of our interpretation of Valla. On the basis of syntactic construction and a 
strictly textual analysis of the gamma variant — “but how much... and that 
no one ... and that dialectic is ... our Lorenzo has begun to write ...” — the 
former possibility would, it is true, seem more likely. That is, the reference 
to the Disputationes would indicate that the work was not yet finished, if 
not still in the planning stages. As noted above, this is the sense in which 
the gamma variant was understood by Lorch. No differently — we should 
add — was the passage in question interpreted by Radetti in his translation 
149 See the references in note 136 above. The meaning of the related terms “dialectic” 
and “logic,” as used by Valla, can be deduced from a comparative reading of the three dif- 
ferent versions of chapter 1, book III of the Disputationes, entitled, “Whence dialectic and 
logic are thus-called ...” (“Unde dicatur dialectica logicaque ...”; [cf. Valla, Repastinatio dia- 
lectice et philosophie, 1:278]); cf. Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 17-9. 


[PDF page 272]
252 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
of De vero falsoque bono. Nevertheless, on account of the arguments 
adduced above and the significance that the gamma variant seems to take 
on in the general context of Valla’s work, we are inclined to think that the 
reference to the Disputationes indicates a literary composition in its final 
and definitive form. This is how it is understood by Valla; and it is, in fact, 
the case. For otherwise — and this is the clinching argument, a kind of 
counterproof and definitive confirmation — it would be impossible to 
explain why the text of the gamma variant remains unaltered in the suc- 
cessive delta revision of De vero falsoque bono. For by then the Disputationes 
had not only been completed and diffused but had undergone further 
revision in a second and a third redaction. 
For the general subject of our essay, however, it seems instead more 
important to complete the interpretation of Valla’s text currently under 
examination. Such would help us both to understand better the import 
and the contextual significance of the variant in the gamma redac- 
tion, and, at the same time, to clarify more precisely Valia’s critique of 
Boethius and the conclusions it reaches. For it is at this point that Valla 
declares his rejection (contemnere) and condemnation (damnare) of 
Boethian philosophy, appealing — seemingly as a final argument but actu- 
ally as a foundational one — to the very fonts of theology and the faith: 
Scripture and the Church Fathers. Valla’s rejection of Boethian philosophy, 
then, is not only based on his rediscovery of Quintilian’s Institutio, but first 
and foremost on his invocation, “resting on the authority of faith,” of Paul 
and Jerome. 
According to Valla, Paul rejected philosophy, the “wisdom” of the 
Greeks, while Jerome (“and certain others”) denounced philosophers as 
heresiarchs. The textual references here are traditional topoi, easy to 
locate: Colossians 2:8 and Jerome’s Letter to Ctesiphon (ep. 133), in which 
he quotes Tertulian’s statement (Against Hermogenes, ch. 9): “philoso- 
phers are the patriarchs of the heretics.”°° It suffices for the reference to 
Paul to mention that it would be taken up again, and more explicitly, in 
the Encomium. The reference to Jerome’s Letter to Ctesiphon, however, 
requires further clarification. 
180 Jerome, Epistola ad Ctesiphontem (ep. 133), in PL 22:47-1161, at 148 (tr. W.H. 
Fremantle, G. Lewis, and W.G. Martley, in Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Second Series, 
eds. Philip Schaff and Henry Wace, 14 vols. (New York: Christian Literature Publishing Co., 
1890-1900), vol. 6: St. Jerome: Letters and Select Works (1893), from the on-line text 
(accessed 03.09.2012): http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/300133.htm). 


[PDF page 273]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 253 
Jerome’s Letter to Ctesiphon is used as a contextual backdrop for the 
antinomy between philosophy and theology. It is both brought up here 
and emphasized again in the concluding section of chapter 12, book III of 
De vero falsoque bono. Jerome adduces certain philosophical categories 
and teachings (in this specific case, from the sphere of Stoicism) for the 
purpose of demonstrating their incompossibility and general incompati- 
bility with the categories and teachings of New Testament Scripture. It is 
in this regard — that is, with regard to these specific philosophical ideas 
opposed to the Christian faith — that Jerome writes, 
Can there be greater presumption than to claim not likeness to God but 
equality with Him, and so to compress into a few words the poisonous doc- 
trines of all the heretics which in their turn flow from the statements of the 
philosophers, particularly of Pythagoras and Zeno the founder of the Stoic 
school? 
Later he adds, “well does one of our own writers say, ‘the philosophers are 
the patriarchs of the heretics.’ It is they who have stained with their per- 
verse doctrine the spotlessness of the Church.”!! 
Valla echoes Jerome’s words, transferring them to the immediate con- 
text of his critique of Boethius. What is more, this same letter of Jerome 
causes Valla to connect the theoretical antinomy (philosophy vs. theol- 
ogy) closely with the actual theological life of a Christian. Hence the final 
words of Valla’s passage, which once again echo well-known texts of Paul: 
“boastful philosophy ... did not love and worship God, despite its knowing 
him or capacity for doing so. It preferred to fornicate with the lovers of the 
earth,”2 
151 [bid., 148: “Quae enim potest alia maior esse temeritas, quam Dei sibi non dicam 
similitudinem, sed aequalitatem, vindicare, et brevi sententia omnium haereticorum 
venena complecti, quae de philosophorum et maxime Pythagorae et Zenonis principis 
Stoicorum fonte manarunt? ... pulchre quidam nostrorum ait: philosophi, patriarchae hae- 
reticorum, Ecclesiae puritatem perversa maculavere doctrina’” (tr. Fremantle, Lewis, and 
Martley, in Schaff and Wace (eds.), Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers). 
152 Tn Valla, De vero falsoque bono (ed. Lorch), 203 (apparatus II), Lorch cites as sources 
for this passage Jerome, In Isaiam V 23,2 and In epistulam ad Galatas III 5, respectively in 
PL 24:206—207 and PL 26:416—419. These same references are provided by Radetti in Valla, 
Scritti filosofici e religiosi, 204, n. 3, but to our mind they are insufficient and should be sub- 
stituted with those we have spoken about here. Valla’s critique of Boethius’s Consolation of 
Philosophy is not considered at all by Pierre Paul Courcelle, La Consolation de Philosophie 
dans la tradition littéraire. Antécédents et postérité de Boéce (Paris: Etudes Augustiniennes, 
1967), 317-332; but how to explain “the new spirit developed by the Renaissance” and that 
“this new spirit caused the Consolation to be read much less”? It seems to us rather reduc- 
tive to assign the reason to a change in literary taste: ibid., 332. 


[PDF page 274]
254 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
4. RHETORIC AS A MODE OF THEOLOGIZING: THE HUMANIST SOLUTION TO 
THE PROBLEM 
“Literature is the light of the intellect” 
—L. Valla, gloss to Quintilian’s Institutio oratoria, book I, proem, 6°? 
In his book on Lorenzo Valla, Mario Fois writes compactly and sugges- 
tively, and with the full support of precise references to primary and sec- 
ondary sources, on the “problem of conscience” in the realm of humanist 
culture. The problem of conscience is the antinomy with which the reli- 
gious believer has had to grapple, ever since the beginning of Christianity, 
between “the love of literature and the desire for God.” This phrase is the 
well-known title of a book by Jean Leclercq, who treated the theme 
throughout the medieval period. Fois, who can be thought of as continu- 
ing Leclercq’s work, followed the question of the antagonistic relationship 
between the Christian faith and the study of ancient pagan literature 
(humanae litterae) into the Renaissance, to see how it was recast in the 
context of humanism. Moreover, Fois sought to identify the many and var- 
ied solutions offered to this problem across the whole arc of early human- 
ism, beginning with the polemic between Albertino Mussato and 
Giovannino da Mantova in the early fourteenth century and ending with 
Valla’s position, especially as it appears in the preface to book IV of the 
Elegantiae. Fois concludes that, for Valla, ‘eloquence’ is both the forum and 
the definitive means for resolving the ‘matter of conscience,’ such that 
“Valla’s solution is the triumph of rhetoric in humanism.”!4 
Fois’s reference to the Elegantiae and his related conclusion are dead 
on; they perfectly highlight Valla’s original and unique contribution to 
overcoming the problem of conscience (in the first half of the fifteenth 
century). The preface, or proemium, to book IV of the Elegantiae is perhaps 
the text that gives most explicit and complete voice to the humanist 
attempt to establish the proper relationship between rhetoric and theo- 
logical study. What would be declared programmatically in the Encomium 
of1457 regarding the “proper mode of theologizing” is developed compactly 
153 Ms. Paris, Bibl. Nat., Lat. 7723, f. 2v: “Lumen ingenii sunt litterae.” 
154 See Fois, Il pensiero cristiano di Lorenzo Valla, above all ch. 5: “Il problema di cosci- 
enza dell’Umanesimo e la soluzione valliana” (pp. 195-260), esp. 249-258. The other 
reference is to Jean Leclercq, Cultura umanistica e desiderio di Dio (Firenze: Sansoni, 1965) 
(from the original French: Lamour des lettres et le désir de Dieu [Paris: Editions du Cerf, 
1957 |) [English translation = The Love of Learning and the Desire for God: A Study of Monastic 
Culture, tr. Catharine Masrahi (New York: Fordham University Press, 1961)]. 


[PDF page 275]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 255 
in the preface from the 1440s. Beginning with a formulation of the prob- 
lem, put in the mouth of an anonymous objector, Valla elaborates his own 
particular solution to the antinomy between theology and pagan litera- 
ture. We therefore think it opportune to offer a close textual analysis of 
the preface to book IV of the Elegantiae, and then to compare it with the 
theological epistemology sketched by Thomas in Article 3, Question II of 
his Commentary on Boethius. The purpose of this comparison is to arrive at 
a substantive verification of the difference between the methodology of 
Valla’s humanist theology and that of Thomist theology and scholasticism 
in general. 
4.1. The proemium to Book IV of the Elegantiae: The Place of the ‘Problem 
of Conscience’ and the Topos of Jerome's Dream in the Letter to Eustochium 
I know well that some people, especially among those who think themselves 
holier and more religious, will dare to criticize my purpose and my work as 
unworthy of a Christian, because I recommend the reading of secular 
books.!§5 
These are the first lines of the preface, the first blows of the objection to 
which Valla intends to respond with an apology both for his work in gen- 
eral and for the Elegantiae in particular. Actually, it was the same objection 
that, ever since the beginning of Christianity, had continuously cropped 
up across the centuries in the learned and devout tradition of the religious 
community. Raised and sustained by those “who think themselves holier 
and more religious,” it insisted on the radical antinomy between “the read- 
ing of the secular books” of the pagans and a specifically Christian culture, 
i.e. the insuperable antagonism between the study of ancient pagan litera- 
ture (humanae litterae) and being a Christian. According to this view, the 
love of literature ought to stay on the fringes of the Gospel, if not be extin- 
guished altogether in theological faith and repudiated as “unworthy of a 
Christian,” since it stands in antithesis to the desire for God. 
Thus we once again encounter, clearly enunciated in the first lines of 
the preface to book IV of the Elegantiae, the same problematic that 
Thomas recast in Question II of his Commentary on Boethius. If visualized 
185 Valla, Elegantiae, book IV, preface (ed. Garin), 612: “Scio ego nonnullos, eorum prae- 
sertim qui sibi sanctiores et religiosiores videntur, ausuros meum institutum hoc 
laboremque reprehendere, ut indignum christiano homine, ubi adhortor ceteros ad libro- 
rum saecularium lectionem.” [All translations of the proemium are based on Garin’s Italian 
version in ibid., which Camporeale follows. ] 


[PDF page 276]
256 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
graphically, the coordinates of the problem would be plotted symmetri- 
cally: along the axis of the constant (being a Christian) they would overlap 
or perhaps be identical, while in the quadrants of the variable (the various 
aspects and heuristic tools of classical culture) they would diverge, per- 
haps radically. Therefore, their respective solutions, reached or devised in 
different historical periods of Christianity, actually end up being positions 
whose adoption and particular significance lie in systems with utterly dis- 
parate points of reference. In Thomas, the terms of the antinomy were: 
philosophy, or “secular wisdom” (sapientia saecularis), on the one hand, 
and theology (sacra doctrina), or the “science of faith” (scientia fidei), 
on the other; in Valla, they are: eloquence, or “knowledge of literature” 
(doctrina litterarum), on the one hand, and the Christian religion (chris- 
tiana religio), or being a “Christian” (christianus homo), on the other. 
Nevertheless, both Thomas’s Commentary and Valla’s text are founded on 
the same patristic authority: Jerome’s Letter to Eustochium. 
Thus Valla’s objector takes up the traditional topos of Jerome’s dream 
along with the unappealable and inescapable judgment handed down in 
it by God’s tribunal: “a Ciceronian, not a Christian.” To Jerome’s mind, so 
the objection goes, every believer in the Gospel should aim to be the latter: 
“the same man cannot be both religious and a Tullian.” But if Jerome’s 
reading of Cicero caused him to be sentenced to flogging and to repudiat- 
ing his Ciceronianism both practically and theoretically, should not the 
lovers and promoters of humanae litterae be prosecuted and punished in 
like manner? Writings and undertakings like the Elegantiae, and more 
generally the new literary culture of its time, should suffer the same judg- 
ment and be convicted of the same crime as Jerome, a crime perpetrated 
against Christian tradition and thought: 
this charge does not pertain so much to the present work [the Elegantiae] as 
to me in particular and to other literati whose erudition and study of secular 
literature is condemned. 
The conclusion: lovers of literature ought therefore to be forced to repudi- 
ate pagan antiquity and to repeat Jerome’s pledge that “he would not read 
secular books.”!56 
Valla’s ample response — as if forced into methodological alignment 
with the issues at hand — had to be developed along argumentative lines of 
6 Tbid., 612: “ciceronianus ..., non christianus, quasi non potest fidelis esse et idem tul- 
lianus. Eoque spopondisse ... libros saeculares se non esse lecturum. Hoc crimen non 
magis ad praesens opus pertinet, quam ad me ipsum ac ceteros litteratos, quorum studium 
ac doctrina litterarum saecularium reprehenditur.” 


[PDF page 277]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 257 
a wholly rhetorical nature. It is thus natural for his refutation (refutatio) of 
the anti-humanist thesis to begin with a counter-response in enthymemic 
form, i.e. with an argument ex contrariis or ex repugnantibus (cf. Quintilian, 
Institutio oratoria, V.14.1-4). This argument would ultimately be resolved 
with the invocation of another traditional, authoritative topos from 
Jerome — this one in favor of the study of classical literature: the Letter to 
Magnus (PL 22:664-668). It is between these two passages from Jerome’s 
letters to Eustochium and to Magnus - which had long been the extremes 
of the enduring polarization underlying the debate over the love of litera- 
ture and the desire for God — that Valla now situates his own defense of 
rhetoric as the handmaiden of theology. The essential traits of Valla’s argu- 
ment make the preface to book IV of the Elegantiae one of the most origi- 
nal expressions, in the fifteenth century, of the grand controversy 
previously debated by Aquinas (on other grounds) in his Commentary on 
Boethius. Valla’s consideration and humanistic revision of both the prob- 
lem and the solutions would directly inspire Erasmus’s Life of Jerome (Vita 
Hieronymi) of 1516.19” 
4.2. The Letter to Eustochium and Jerome’s Dream: The Common Plato- 
Plautus Variant in Jerome’s Text and Philosophy—Eloquence, 
Ornamentation, and Quintilian’s Rhetoric as a Science 
The enthymeme used by Valla to counter the critique of humanism tran- 
scends the purely formal limits of an apologetic argument. Indeed, it is 
turned around into a critique of scholasticism, and it attacks the very 
theological praxis which gave rise to both the polemic against the study of 
classical literature and the attendant alternative proposal for theological 
study. Valla flings the ambiguity, or rather the contradictoriness, of their 
position right back at the sustainers of the anti-humanist thesis, whom he 
brands as responsible for the contemporary decline of letters (“who are in 
large part responsible for making a ruin and a shipwreck of Latin litera- 
ture”!58), From his point of view, they cannot appeal to the authority of 
Jerome’s Letter to Eustochium. For if the study of classical literature is 
indeed contrary to the Christian name, then the study of pagan philoso- 
phy is equally unworthy of evangelic faith, since it, too, is repudiated in 
157 On “Jerome’s dream” and its use in humanism from Salutati to Erasmus, cf. the refer- 
ence to Fois in note 154 above, and Emile V. Telle, L’Erasmianus sive Ciceronianus d‘Etienne 
Dolet (1535) (Genéve: Droz, 1974), 389-390 and 422-423. 
158 Valla, Elegantiae, book IV, preface (ed. Garin), 612: “quorum culpa non ex minima 
parta latinae litterae iacturam naufragiumque fecerunt.” 


[PDF page 278]
258 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
the same letter. Consistency demands that, if the divine condemnation of 
Jerome is accepted as conforming with the Christian spirit, then it must be 
extended to all the historical and literary expressions of secular wisdom: 
“all the orators, all the historians, all the poets, all the philosophers, all the 
jurisconsults, and all the other writers” of the pagan world, Greek and 
Ibatinds? 
Having been shown to be in contradiction with himself, the objector is 
forced to repropose the thesis of Jerome’s condemnation and its norma- 
tive implications in a more circumscribed form. Specifically, he is forced 
to reduce the opposition between Christianity (religio christiana) and 
secular wisdom (sapientia saecularis) to the incompossibility between 
Christian faith and classical eloquence (eloquentia): 
When Jerome is rebuked for being a Ciceronian, it is actually for being an 
enthusiast of eloquence. Therefore, whoever reads eagerly in order to 
become eloquent knows that he will be condemned and rejected.!©° 
But it is precisely this restriction of the antinomy between Christian and 
classical culture that gives Valla the possibility of setting the problem and 
its solution within a specific frame. The objector’s extremely reductive 
conception of eloquence (eloquentia) as ornamentation (ornatus), derived 
from a decadent kind of Ciceronianism, is opposed with another, fuller 
and more comprehensive conception: eloquence (eloquentia) as the disci- 
pline of rhetoric (rhetorica), a critico-stylistic analysis of language and of 
systematic knowledge: 
Is there really nothing in those [secular] books except eloquence? Do we 
find no account of former times nor histories of the pagans, ignorance of 
which befits only boys? Aren’t there many things pertaining to morals? Isn’t 
there a treatment of all the disciplines?!® 
Valla does not immediately pursue the contrast between rhetoric and 
ornamentation, by which he might have resolved the antinomy in ques- 
tion. Instead, the differentiation, based on an organic and holistic concep- 
tion of rhetoric (in the tradition of Isocrates and Quintilian), is taken up 
‘89 Tbid., 612: “omnes oratores, omnes historici, omnes poetae, omnes philosophi, 
omnes iurisconsulti, ceteri quoque scriptores.” 
160 Tbid., 614: “Cum Hieronymus quod ciceronianus est, reprehenditur, id reprehenditur 
quod studiosus eloquentiae esset. Ideoque damnati et repulsi intelliguntur, qui comparan- 
dae eloquentiae gratia lectitantur.” 
161 Tbid., 614: “Nihil ne in illis libris [saecularibus] nisi eloquentia est? non memoria 
temporum gentiumque historiae, sine quibus nemo non puer est? non multa ad mores 
pertinentia? non omnium disciplinarum tractatio?” 


[PDF page 279]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 259 
later, slowly, as the enthymemic discourse develops and focuses on the 
alternative proposal of a humanist theology. For the time being, Valla’s 
argument remains entirely within the ambiguity of the restrictive defini- 
tion according to which eloquence is stylistic technique and a discipline 
for regulating the formal aspects of rhetorical expression. The Jerominian 
objector is thus forced into self-contradiction, while the premises of his 
critique of humanism vis-a-vis theology are themselves invalidated. 
“Therefore, either we shall read eloquent books or we shall not read 
them at all,” Valla reasons, pursuing the ambiguity of the rhetorical for- 
malism maintained by his adversary.!®? But Jerome, he adds immediately, 
was condemned in the dream described in the Letter to Eustochium on 
account not only of his love of Cicero but also of his reading of Plato. 
The reference to Greek philosophy was actually a variant in the manu- 
script tradition of the text available to Valla, standing in place of the 
original “Plautus.” The contraction of Plautus into Plato, owed to easily 
deducible mechanisms of transmission, was in fact ancient and wide- 
spread; the authentic reading has only been restored in modern editions 
of Jerome’s letters.!®3 Be that as it may, this variant had the force to deter- 
mine the development and the substance of Valla’s argument, which con- 
tinues: “in both — Plato and Cicero — you don’t know if the philosopher or 
the rhetorician is greater.” So then: 
if the books of the ancients are all so eloquent that when they teach wisdom 
they are possessed of the highest eloquence, and when they teach eloquence 
the highest wisdom, which ones will we condemn for eloquence?'®4 
In this way, the enthymeme of the counter-objection is simplified, brought 
back to the immediacy of the terms in contradiction, and thus restored 
through reduction to its basic contrary unit, namely the incompossibility 
of philosophy and theology. 
The variant of Plato for Plautus, as has been said, in large part deter- 
mines the route along which Valla’s discourse unfolds. And indeed, the 
162 Jbid., 614: “Ita aut eloquentes, aut nulli libri legendi erunt.” 
163 [See Eugene Rice, Saint Jerome in the Renaissance (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1985), 231, n. 7: “Several of the early manuscripts ..., all the medieval lives 
of St. Jerome, and all commentators on this passage before Erasmus read Plato instead of 
Plautus.” See also the apparatus criticus to Jerome, Epistulae, ed. Isidorus Hilberg, 3 vols. 
(Vienna: F. Tempsky, 1910-1918), vol. 1 (Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum, 54), 
189, line 16. Eds. ] 
164 Valla, Elegantiae, book IV, preface (ed. Garin), 614: “quorum uterque nescias praes- 
tantior sit philosophus an orator. Quod si omnes libri veterum ita sunt eloquentes, ut vel 
plurimum sapientiae, ita tradentes sapientiam, ut vel plurimum eloquentiae habeant, qui- 
nam isti erunt quos ob eloquentiam damnandos putemus?” 


[PDF page 280]
260 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
inclusion of the “reading of Plato” as grounds for the judgment of Jerome 
causes Valla to interpret the condemnation, “a Ciceronian, not a Christian,” 
as an incrimination specifically of philosophy. It is the philosophy (phi- 
losophia) of Plato and Cicero that stands in opposition to the reading of 
sacred scripture (lectio sacrae scripturae), not the forensic eloquence (elo- 
quentia) of the Latin orator or the elegance (facundia) of the Greek 
philosopher. 
Since Jerome confesses to having eagerly read those two [sc. Plato and 
Cicero], take care lest you ought to think it was said not so much about 
Cicero’s rhetorical works than about his philosophical ones. I have no doubt 
that it was said about his philosophical works, since only philosophers are 
named. As for the fact that no objection was made to his Platonism, as if by 
reading Plato he were doing something holy, but only to his Ciceronianism, 
it is because, as a Latin, he had a greater desire to imitate the style of 
Cicero — a style, I say, which he used in questions of philosophy, not in foren- 
sic cases or speeches or in the Senate. For Jerome strove to become a writer 
of holy disputations, not a civil lawyer.!® 
Hence the counter-question Valla poses to his anti-humanist adversary, 
who had brought up the traditional Jerominian topos in the first place: 
Why shouldn’t we then believe that Plato hurt him no less than Cicero? Why 
not the philosophers more than the orators?166 
The response to this question actually takes the form ofa reiteration of the 
anti-humanist stance. But once again, Valla brings the objector’s insis- 
tence on combating the study of literature back around to the initial ambi- 
guity between eloquence and ornamentation. Thus the renewal of the 
objection is now turned on its head, transformed into the definitive and 
precise clarification of the fundamental ambiguity. Valla’s adversary 
responds to the counter-question by repeating his own interpretation of 
Jerome’s text — “but the ornamentation, not the knowledge, of speaking is 
what was rebuked”!©” — and so Valla puts his case as explicitly as possible: 
165 Tbid., 614-16: “Cum eos duos lectitasse se Hieronymus fateatur, vide ne non tam de 
oratoriis potius Ciceronis operibus quam de philosophicis dictum existimare debeas. Ego 
certe de philosophicis dictum accipio, ubi soli philosophi nominantur; quodque platoni- 
cus esset ideo non obiectum, quasi sancte faceret Platonem legens, sed tantum ciceronia- 
nus, quod homo latinus magis Ciceronis stylum cupiebat exprimere, stylum, inquam, quo 
ille utebatur in quaestionibus philosphiae, non quali in forensibus causis concionibusve 
aut in senatu. Non enim orator causarum civilium Hieronymus, sed scriptor sanctarum 
disputationum studebat evadere.” 
‘6° Tbid., 616: “Cur non ergo credamus non minus Platonem nocuisse ei quam 
Ciceronem? Cur non magis philosophos quam oratores?” 
167 Tbid., 616: “at ornatus ipse dicendi reprehensus est, non scientia.” 


[PDF page 281]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 261 
since eloquence (e/oquentia) is an integral part of rhetoric, it is not possi- 
ble to have authentic eloquence without knowledge (scientia), and vice 
versa. The condemnation of eloquence would thus necessitate the rejec- 
tion of all knowledge (scientia); and the accusation, “a Ciceronian, not a 
Christian,” would then require, as its immediate consequence, that 
Christians reject all culture, including both Ciceronian doctrines and, in 
this particular case, Platonic philosophy: 
Is there only ornamentation in Cicero? Is there not also philosophy? ... 
Is there not, as I have said, elegance in Plato? ... Why shouldn’t Cicero’s 
philosophy be thought to have hurt Jerome more than his art of 
speaking?168 
It is at this point that Valla raises the central issue, the one which the 
entire preface is aimed at expressing and providing with argumentative 
coherence: the distinction, or better, the contrast between philosophy 
and eloquence vis-a-vis theology, stated here, finally, in its full range 
of meaning. The ambiguity between eloquence and ornamentation — 
the foundation of the objection to humanism — disappears, and the art 
of speaking (ars dicendi) takes on the organic and holistic significance of 
rhetoric (rhetorica). Valla’s text thus ends up being directly connected 
(even the same expressions and patristic references are encountered) 
with chapter 12, book III of De vero falsoque bono and with the open- 
ing pages of De libero arbitrio. The conclusions are identical: (1) philoso- 
phy is the origin and (historical) manifestation of heresy; (2) the 
negative judgment of philosophy is a constant in the Christian tradition; 
(3) the incompossibility between philosophy and the Christian religion is 
radical. 
Now we come to the most significant passage of Valla’s text, which fol- 
lows immediately upon the last quotation: 
Here I do not want to compare philosophy and eloquence by saying which 
one is able to do more harm. Many people have spoken on this matter, show- 
ing that philosophy is barely consonant with the Christian religion and that 
all heresies flow forth from the fonts of philosophy, whereas rhetoric has 
nothing that is not praiseworthy: it teaches to invent and to arrange, as if 
giving bones and sinews to speech; to ornament, that is, to endow speech 
168 Jbid., 616: “numquid tantum in Cicerone ornatus? non et philosophia? ... non, ut 
dixi, in Platone facundia? .... Cur non potius Ciceronis philosophia nocuisse putanda 
Hieronymo est quam ars dicendi?” 


[PDF page 282]
262 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
with flesh and color; and finally to memorize and deliver properly, that is, to 
give speech life and action.!©9 
Against the concept of eloquence as ornamentation, Valla enunciates the 
definition of rhetoric in all its fullness. Thus all the parts of speech 
(oratio) — understood as an expression crafted by the art of rhetoric (ars 
rhetorica) — are described, albeit with abbreviated formulations: invention 
(inventio), arrangement (dispositio), elocution (elocutio), memory (memo- 
ria), and delivery (actio or pronuntiatio). There is an implicit reference to 
Quintilian’s Institutio oratoria here, in which the five parts of speech (ora- 
tio) constitute the vast and complex structure along which the whole work 
unfolds (cf. book III, chapter 3). 
Having provided this definition of rhetoric, Valla moves on. How, he 
asks, thus posing anew the whole question at hand, could rhetoric — the 
science of language, the technique and methodology of speaking — hurt 
the study of divine things and thus be incompossible with Christian dis- 
course? There will be an insuperable contrast, an insoluble aporia in the 
relationship between rhetoric and Christian speech if and only if the con- 
tent and the praxis of the latter, namely “true wisdom and the virtues” 
(veram sapientiam atque virtutes), are rejected. And it is precisely this 
rejection of the Gospel — may it be noted in passing, in support of what 
Valla says here — that Jerome actually confesses to when narrating his own 
“story of unhappiness” in the Letter to Eustochium. “Lord,” Jerome cries, in 
recognition of his sinful attachment to pagan wisdom, “if ever again I pos- 
sess secular books, if ever again I read them, I have denied You.”!”° But 
Valla continues beyond this point, further clarifying and enriching his 
argument, as will be clear from the sequel to our exposition.!7! 
169 Tbid., 616: “Nolo hoc in loco comparationem facere inter philosophiam et eloquen- 
tiam, utra magis obesse possit, de quo multi dixerunt ostendentes philosophiam cum reli- 
gione christiana vix cohaerere omnesque haereses ex philosophiae fontibus profluxisse, 
rhetoricam vero nihil habere nisi laudabile, ut invenias, ut disponas, quasi ossa et nervos 
orationi des, ut ornes, hoc est, ut carnem coloremque inducas, postremo ut memoriae 
mandes decenterque pronunties, hoc est, ut illi spiritum actionemque tribuas” (emphasis 
added). 
170 Jerome, Epistola ad Eustochium (ep. 22), PL 22:394—425, at 416: “infelicitatis historia”; 
ibid., 417: “Domine, si unquam habuero codices saeculares, si legero, te negavi” (tr. 
Fremantle, Lewis, and Martley in Schaff and Wace (eds.), Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, 
modified), 
"71 For fifteenth-century discussions on the conception and practice of rhetoric, see the 
important and rich contibution of John Monfasani, George of Trebisond. A Biography and a 
Study of his Rhetoric and Logic (Leiden: Brill, 1976), esp. 241-299. 


[PDF page 283]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 263 
4.3. The Mechanical Arts, the Liberal Arts, and the Christian Religion: 
Temple of God/Word of God and the Recovery of the Original Text of 
Sacred Scripture-Quintilian’s Definition: “Oratory, Queen of the World” 
(Institutio oratoria, [.72.17-29), and Valla’s Conception of Rhetoric (Jerome’s 
Letter to Magnus) 
Rhetoric’s innate usefulness as a “science” in the service of Christianity, 
Valla continues, is not inferior to that expressed by and embodied in the 
other arts (artes), both liberal and technical. In other words, the liturgical 
use of painting and sculpture, engraving and music — to mention only the 
artistic activities expressly indicated by Valla — suggests that rhetoric, as 
the science of language, should be used in theology to the same extent and 
according to the same principles. Here it must be noted, and with a cer- 
tain emphasis, that a close relationship is posited between the two kinds 
of aesthetic and creative activity, despite the fact that they were generally 
placed on disparate levels of value and differentiated according to kind. 
Obviously, we intend to call attention here to the distinction between the 
mechanical arts (artes mechanicae), like painting, sculpture, etc., and the 
liberal arts (disciplinae liberales) of the trivium and the quadrivium. 
Among the latter, in Valla’s view, rhetoric enjoys hegemonic and educa- 
tional primacy. 
Valla, then, inscribes the whole arc of the expressive faculties within the 
cycle of creative, artistic activities, all the while maintaining the tradi- 
tional distinction between the two kinds of arts and the related subdivi- 
sions specific to each single art. He includes each and every one, focusing 
the entire spectrum of creative activity through the lens of service to 
Christianity. Thus, on the one hand, following Quintilian (Jnstitutio orato- 
ria, XII.10), Valla rhetorically effects the greatest possible connection 
between the two kinds of arts (as has already been underscored by 
Panofsky and recently confirmed by Baxandall).!”2 On the other hand, he 
mirrors the actual artistic praxis of a society that is still culturally Christian. 
And this artistic praxis was emerging, right at the time when Valla was 
drafting the Elegantiae (between the 1430s and 1440s), in the form of the 
most original and extraordinary renaissance in history. Valla himself 
observes as much, and with a certain emphasis, right from the very begin- 
ning of the Elegantiae (preface to book J). 
172, Erwin Panofsky, Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art (London: Paladin, 1970), 
16; Michael Baxandall, Giotto and the Orators. Humanist Observers of Painting in Italy and 
the Discovery of Pictorial Composition: 1350-1450 (Oxford; Clarendon, 1971), 117-120. 


[PDF page 284]
264 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Here it should also be noted that Valla’s tightening of the connection 
between the two kinds of arts is not only found in the preface to the 
first book of the Elegantiae and in the Oration of 1455. Rather, it is a theme 
that runs throughout his writings, which consistently posit a close rela- 
tionship between the cycle of the arts (artes) and the order of the various 
sciences (scientiae), both of them impressed into the cultural service of 
Christian society. In the preface to book IV of the Elegantiae, this theme 
even recurs twice: first after the passage cited above, and then at the end. 
This second passage would be reused, and with more precise force, in the 
dedicatory letter to Nicholas V prefacing the Collatio Novi Testamenti 
(1453). Furthermore, it must be noted that in the three passages just now 
mentioned (the first two in the proemium to bk. IV of the Elegantiae, and 
the third in the dedicatory letter to the Collatio) Valla makes use of the 
highly significant distinction between the temple (templum) and the city 
(civitas). And although in doing so he respects the traditional form of the 
spatial, religious, and civic dimensions of the respublica christiana 
(arising from scriptural sources), he defines them in a way that detaches 
them from their past state, linking them instead to the very artistic and 
intellectual advances then being made in the early-fifteenth-century 
Renaissance. 
Let us review the passages mentioned above and undertake a compara- 
tive reading of them: 
Could I conceive of this art [rhetoric] having a harmful function? Certainly 
no more than the art of painting, of sculpture, of engraving, or, to mention 
the liberal arts, of music. And if much use and ornament derives for divine 
things from those who sing well, paint well, and sculpt well, and also 
from the other arts — such that they seem to have been born for this very 
purpose ~ all the more so will such be derived from those who are eloquent. 
(Elegantiae, book IV, proemium)!”8 
The other sciences and arts occupy a middle ground, to be used for good or 
for evil .... You see what wondrous decoration adorned Aaron’s raiment, the 
Ark of the Covenant, and Solomon’s temple. Thus eloquence seems to me to 
have the meaning of what the noble tragedian calls the queen of the world 
and perfect wisdom. And so others decorate their private dwellings, like 
those who study civil law, canon law, medicine, or philosophy, making no 
3 Valla, Elegantiae, book IV, preface (ed. Garin), 616: “Hanc ego artem obfuturam par- 
tem putem? Profecto non magis quam pingendi, fingendi, caelandi et, ut de liberalibus 
dicam, quam musices artem. Et si ex his qui bene canunt, bene pingunt, bene fingunt, 
ceterisque ex artibus multum usus atque ornamenti divinis rebus accedit, ut prope ad hanc 
rem natae esse videantur, profecto multo plus accedet ex eloquentibus.” 


[PDF page 285]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 265 
contribution to the divine. Let us decorate the house of God, so that those 
entering it are not roused by its neglect to contempt, but by its majestic con- 
dition to religion. (Elegantiae, bk. IV, proemium)'74 
Each word of holy scripture is like a gem or precious stone from which the 
heavenly Jerusalem is constructed. For the cities of other disciplines, so to 
speak, were constructed partly of bricks, like civil law, partly of tufa, like 
medicine, partly of marble, like astronomy, and the rest in like fashion. But 
the city of the Gospel is of nothing but gems; it is nobler to be the humblest 
builder there than to be an architect in the others. What then? Am I myself 
an architect of this city? If only I were one of its builders! Yet it has fewer 
architects and builders than is generally believed. Those who dare to con- 
struct works of stone in that city, to say nothing of wood, plaster, or straw, are 
in no way worthy of the name of builder or architect, since they mix certain 
vain and empty sciences with divine ones. For my part I am not building a 
new work [referring to the Collatio] but have tried, as it were, to the best of 
my abilities to keep the roof of this city’s temple in good repair. Because if it 
is not maintained, the temple itself must of necessity leak, and it will not be 
able to accommodate the divine fittingly. (Collatio Novi Testamenti, dedica- 
tory letter)!”5 
Let us now consider these three passages, in order of last to first, with 
regard to the theme in question, namely the relationship between rheto- 
ric and theology. In the passage cited from the introduction to the 
Collatio, rhetoric is taken up as the unique and necessary tool for biblical 
174 Tbid., 622: “Ceterae autem scientiae atque artes in medio sunt positae, quibus et bene 
uti possis et male .... Vides quam mirabili ornamento vestes Aaron distinguantur, quam 
arca foederis, quam templum Salomonis. Per hoc mihi significari eloquentia videtur, quae, 
ut ait nobilis tragicus, regina rerum est et perfecta sapientia. Itaque alii ornant domos priva- 
tas: hi sunt qui student iuri civili, canonico, medicinae, philosophiae, nihil ad rem divinam 
conferentes. Nos ornemus domum Dei, ut in eam ingredientes non ex situ ad contemptum, 
sed ex maiestate loci ad religionem concitentur” (emphasis added). 
175 Lorenzo Valla, Collatio Novi Testamenti, redazione inedita a cura di Alessandro 
Perosa (Firenze: Sansoni, 1970), 6.25ff.-7.1ff.: “Singula enim verba divine scripture sunt tan- 
quam singule gemme lapidesque pretiosi, ex quibus Hierusalem celestis extruitur. Nam 
aliarum doctrinarum, ut ita loquar, urbes partim e lateribus, ut ius civile, partim e topho, 
ut medicina, partim e marmore, ut astronomia, et item cetere extructe sunt; evangelica 
vero nonnisi e gemmis, in qua vel minimum structorem esse preclarius, est quam in ceteris 
architectum. Quid igitur? Sum ne ego eius architectus? Utinam essem vel structor! Cuius 
tamen non tot architecti sunt atque structores, quot vulgo creduntur, nequaquam digni 
hoc nomine qui lapidea, ne dicam lignea, cretacea, stramentitia opera in ea edificare 
audent, vanas quasdam ineptasque scientias divinis admiscentes. Equidem ipse nihil ope- 
ris novi condo sed velut huius urbis templi sarcta tecta prestare pro mea virili conatus sum, 
quod nisi prestetur templum ipsum perpluat necesse est, nec in eo res divina fieri com- 
mode possit.” [The translation of Christopher S. Celenza has been consulted: Celenza, 
“Lorenzo Valla’s Radical Philology: The “Preface” to the Annotations to the New Testament 
in Context,” Journal of Medieval and Early Modern Studies, 42:2 (2012), 365-394, at 
380-383. ] 


[PDF page 286]
266 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
exegesis, which for Valla consists in the collation of the Vulgate Bible with 
the Greek truth (veritas graeca) of the original text of the New Testament. 
Valla’s statement, it might be noted, is the finale to a series of historico- 
philological premises considered and discussed in the long dedicatory let- 
ter to the Collatio. 
Valla concludes that no “science” or “art” can substitute for rhetoric. It 
is the sole art capable of supplying the proper tools for restoring the tem- 
ple that is Sacred Scripture. For it is only in rhetoric that the divine (res 
divina), i.e., the Word of God, can be recovered and unfurled in all its 
solemnity and hieratic dignity. In plain language, rhetoric is the only sci- 
entific discipline that can offer an analytical and organic principle capable 
of fully restoring the authentic, original text of the Bible. Despite their 
great effectiveness, the other arts and sciences, from law to medicine to 
astronomy, are unable to assist adequately in restoring this Temple of the 
Word, this worldly reflection of the heavenly Jerusalem. Unlike the “cities” 
constructed by the other arts and sciences, this temple has no architects 
or builders but only, so to speak, restorators. It would certainly be a sin to 
aim for more, to attempt a sacrilegious renovation of the Temple of the 
Word, or at least to claim to repair and reinforce walls and roofs and every 
other supporting element, but with an unsuitable and ruinous mixture of 
divine truths and human arts.!”6 
The relationship between the temple (templum) and the city (civitas), 
as spaces for the arts and sciences to be put to use, takes on grander 
dimensions (although still with specific reference to theology) in the sec- 
ond passage, cited from the preface to the fourth book of the Elegantiae. 
With a statement as explicit as it is rare for his writings, Valla affirms that 
the deployment of cultural tools involves, or better, is determined by an 
ethico-political choice. The arts and sciences in general, he specifies fur- 
ther, are intended and often used for the purpose of decorating and adorn- 
ing “private dwellings” (domus private). This example concerns not only 
sciences like medicine and civil law, but also disciplines like canon law 
76 Valla, Collatio Novi Testamenti, 3-7. [For the full Latin text and English translation of 
the preface, see Celenza, “Lorenzo Valla’s Radical Philology.” Eds.] Valla’s analogy is obvi- 
ous, as are its implications, which are the result of a corresponding operational parallelism 
between the “restoration” of the authentic text of the Bible and that of the sacred monu- 
ment of the “temple.” In both cases the same attempt at reconstruction is put in motion, a 
restoration to an original editorial (of the text) or architectural (of the building) state. We 
are not able to ascertain the level of originality in Valla’s comparison between operations 
and techniques that continue to be expressed in terms of “restoration.” Let us only say that 
here the analogy is used by Valla within the particular sphere of the historico-religious 
world: Word of God/Temple of God (Verbum Dei/Templum Dei). 


[PDF page 287]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 267 
and philosophy — a fact whose deep significance can only be fully under- 
stood by attentively noting its context in Valla’s discourse. These are the 
sciences and disciplines intended for the urban construction of the civitas, 
or city, and yet they are to no avail in theology: “[they make] no contribu- 
tion to the divine.” With this original and extremely radical exclusion of 
canon law and philosophy from the catalogue of auxiliary disciplines to 
theology, Valla paved the way to concluding that rhetoric is the true hand- 
maiden of theology. Only rhetoric can provide organic mediation, on the 
level of culture, between “the divine” (res divina) and a man-made “adorn- 
ment” (ornamentum) consonant with and worthy of the house of God 
(domus Dei). Indeed, this house must be as hieratic and solemn, in its 
architectural and ornamental lines, as were Solomon’s temple, Aaron’s 
priestly raiment, and the Ark of the Covenant, which contained the 
ancient tablets of the Law.1”7 
Rhetoric possesses this capacity for organic mediation on account of its 
very nature as the omni-comprehensive science, preeminent above every 
other art or discipline. It is dominion over all things, and at the same time 
it is wisdom about life and knowledge: “it is the queen of the world and 
perfect wisdom.” This definition of rhetoric, which Valla attributes to an 
unnamed tragedian, actually derives from a standard passage (standard 
even for the tradition of medieval rhetoric) of the Institutio oratoria — one, 
however, that Valla has changed and abridged in a significant way. In the 
last section of chapter 12, the final, concluding part of book I of the 
Institutio, Quintilian writes: 
And I trust that there is not one even among my readers who would think of 
calculating the monetary value of such studies. But he that has enough of 
the divine spark to conceive the ideal eloquence, he who, as the great tragic 
poet says, regards “oratory” as “the queen of all the world” and seeks not the 
transitory gains of advocacy, but those stable and lasting rewards which 
his own soul and knowledge and contemplation can give, he will easily per- 
suade himself to spend his time not, like so many, in the theatre or in the 
Campus Martius, in dicing or in idle talk, to say naught of the hours that 
are wasted in sleep or long drawn banqueting, but in listening rather to 
the geometrician and the teacher of music. For by this he will win a richer 
177 Valla’s text increases in meaning if understood within the more general humanist 
discourse on the city. On this point cf. Eugenio Garin, Rinascite e Rivoluzioni. Movimenti 
culturali dal XIV al XVIII secolo (Bari: Laterza, 1975), 235-254; and idem, Scienza e vita civile 
nel Rinascimento italiano (Bari: Laterza, 1965), 33-56. But see also what Alberti says in De re 
aedificatoria, book VII, chapter1 and book IX, chapter1: Leon Battista Alberti, LArchitettura, 
Latin text and Italian translation by Giovanni Orlandi (Milano: Edizioni I] Polifilo, 1966), 
529-537 and 779-788. 


[PDF page 288]
268 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
harvest of delight than can ever be gathered from the pleasures of the 
ignorant.!78 
The unnamed “tragedian” — apparently Valla’s “noble” (nobilis) source 
agrees with his “great” (non ignobilis) counterpart in Quintilian — is the 
Latin writer Pacuvius, who lived between about 220 and about 130 B.C. 
Quintilian, in his historical review of Greek and Roman literature 
(Institutio oratoria, ch. 1, bk. X), counts him as one of the earliest excellent 
Roman tragedians: 
Among writers of tragedy Accius and Pacuvius are most remarkable for the 
force of their general reflections (gravitatem sententiarum), the weight of 
their words (verborum pondere), and the dignity of their characters (auctori- 
tate personarum).!”9 
In his tragedy Hermiona, Pacuvius echoes a verse from Euripides’ 
Hecuba — “persuasion, sole queen of mankind” — and with an expression 
not unworthy of the original calls eloquence the highest and most effec- 
tive art of persuasion: “the persuader and queen of all the world.”!8° 
Pacuvius’ translation of Euripides had already inspired Cicero in De 
oratore. And it is probably through the medium of Cicero’s dialogue, if 
not directly from it, that Quintilian takes up the description of eloquence 
as “queen of the world.” In De oratore we read: 
But so potent is that Eloquence, rightly styled, by an excellent poet, “per- 
suader and queen of all the world,” that she can not only support the sinking 
and bend the upstanding, but, like a good and brave commander, can even 
make prisoner a resisting antagonist.!®! 
8 Quintilian, Istitutio oratoria, 1.12.17—-19: “nec velim quidem lectorem dari mihi quid 
studia referant computaturum. qui vero imaginem ipsam eloquentiae divina quadam 
mente conceperit quique illam (ut ait non ignobilis tragicus) reginam rerum orationem, 
ponet ante oculos fructumque non ex stipe advocationum sed ex animo suo et contempla- 
tione ac scientia petet perpetuum illum nec fortunate subiectum, facile persuadebit sibi, ut 
tempora, quae spectaculis, campo, tesseris, otiosis denique sermonibus, ne dicam somno 
et conviviorum mora conteruntur, geometrae potius ac musico impendat, quanto plus 
delectationis habiturus quam ex illis ineruditis voluptatibus” (tr. EH. Butler; emphasis 
added). 
179 Jbid., X.1.97: “tragoediae scriptores veterum Accius atque Pacuvius clarissimi gravi- 
tatem sententiarum, verborum pondere, auctoritate personarum’ (tr. E.H. Butler). 
180 Euripides, Hecuba, v. 816: “peithd de tén tyrannon anthropois monén’; Pacuvius, 
Hermiona, fr. 187: “flexanima atque omnium regina rerum.” Euripides’ passage should be 
read in its fuller context (Hecuba, wv. 814-819) as confirmation of the imitation of him that 
underlies all of Pacuvius’ work. 
181 Cicero, De oratore, tr. E.W. Sutton and H. Rackham, 2 vols. (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1988), II. 44.187: “tantam vim habet illa, quae recte a bono 
poeta dicta est flexanima atque omnium regina rerum, oratio, ut non modo inclinantem 


[PDF page 289]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 269 
But the art of persuasion’s sophistic ascendance to primacy does not keep 
the conception of rhetoric from undergoing a radical transformation in 
the Institutio oratoria. Indeed, in Quintilian’s text rhetoric takes on much 
fuller dimensions and, as a consequence, acquires specific characteristics 
that differentiate it from the conception of Euripides and Pacuvius as well 
as from the one found in Cicero’s De oratore. At the end of chapter 12, book 
I of the Institutio (text quoted on p. 267 above), Quintilian does not stop 
merely at extending the art of eloquence beyond the realm of forensic per- 
formance. On the one hand he elevates rhetoric to the primary and hege- 
monic function of governing ethical and civil conduct in society (“queen 
of all the world”). On the other he considers it an instrument of knowledge 
(scientia) and a context for contemplation (contemplatio), for the interior 
formation of the individual. Thus rhetoric is simultaneously knowledge 
and language (practical and theoretical), dealing both with contingent 
events and with the social and personal world not subject to ‘fortune,’ i.e. 
the civic community and the individual’s interior mind. 
Since the text and the context of Quintilian’s work converge in substan- 
tiating this definition and conception of rhetoric, Valla could not have 
found a better passage in the tradition of classical rhetoric to which to 
refer for resolving the antinomy between rhetoric and theology. It was still 
necessary, however, to make the reference to Quintilian act as more than 
a mere citation in support of the counter-response to the objector and his 
anti-humanist thesis. With a decisive and most effective act of linguistic- 
semantic dislocation, in which specific concepts are adopted but their 
content and meaning simultaneously modified, Valla takes up Quintilian’s 
precise conception of rhetoric and at the same time transcends its dimen- 
sions, attributing to it a definite theological function. In Valla’s hands 
rhetoric undergoes a true transformation in kind. 
This becomes clear if the particular linguistic-semantic modality is 
highlighted by which Valla draws on Quintilian’s text and incorporates it 
into the context of his own argument. While repeating Pacuvius’ phrase, 
excipere aut stantem inclinare, sed etiam adversantem ac repugnantem, ut ‘imperator’ 
bonus ac fortis capere possit” (translation modified). See Leeman, Orationis ratio (1974), 
425-427. Important and suggestive, also for a thematic study of the relationship between 
“humanism” and “crisis” in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, are Vernant’s observations 
on the relationship between tragedy and rhetoric: Jean-Pierre Vernant and Pierre Vidal- 
Naquet, Mito e tragedia nell‘antica Grecia (Torino: Einaudi, 1976), 8-28 and esp. n. 1 [origi- 
nal French ed. = Mythe e tragédie en Gréce ancienne (Paris: F. Maspero, 1972); English 
translation = Tragedy and Myth in Ancient Greece, tr. Janet Lloyd (Sussex: Harvester 
Press, 1981) ]. 


[PDF page 290]
270 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
“eloquence, queen of the world” (eloquentia, regina rerum), he encloses 
and synthesizes Quintilian’s entire passage in the compact formula, “rhet- 
oric, perfect wisdom” (rhetorica, perfecta sapientia). Since for Quintilian 
rhetoric is both knowledge (scientia) and contemplation (contemplatio), 
in Valla’s terms it rightfully rises to the level of wisdom (sapientia), insofar 
as it comprehends and governs the totality of human knowledge. It 
includes not only theoretical knowledge but also the ethical and civic 
knowledge peculiar to the collective and individual actions of human 
beings. Thus Valla attributes to rhetoric the practical function of pru- 
dence, and he applies to it the definition that had been the exclusive 
domain of Aristotle’s “first philosophy” (philosophia prima), metaphysics. 
And thus Valla once again puts forth the thesis that had already been 
indicted at his inquisitorial trial in Naples in 1444, although this time with 
greater depth, precision, and meaning: “the orator is more than a lover of 
wisdom (philosophos); he is wise (sophos).”182 
Through the medium of Quintilian’s Jnstitutio, then, Valla transforms 
rhetoric into a concept that is incommensurate with the sophistic context 
of Euripides and Pacuvius. For he transfers it, imparting it with qualita- 
tively different characteristics, into the realm of Christian culture and of 
that culture’s foundation, the science of faith (scientia fidei). Indeed, it 
must be stressed that in defining rhetoric as “perfect wisdom,” Valla 
employed a terminology whose deeper significance could not escape 
those familiar with the lexicon of the medieval, scholastic tradition. 
Therefore, by using the name “perfect wisdom,” Valla enunciated rheto- 
ric’s inherent power as forcefully as possible to the holder of the anti- 
humanist thesis: he portrayed it as knowledge in the sense of both 
(practical) prudence and (theoretical) wisdom, and thus as being of the 
greatest organic use to theology. 
This last conclusion brings us back to the other passage from the pref- 
ace to book IV of the Elegantiae, the first of the three passages quoted 
above. To paraphrase Valla: if all the ‘arts,’ including painting, sculpture, 
engraving, and (among the “liberal” arts) music, contribute together or 
singly to the worship and the dignity of “divine things” (“much use and 
ornament derives for divine things”), such that they seem to have been 
182 Cf. Camporeale, “Da Lorenzo Valla a Tommaso Moro,” 24-25 (reprinted in idem, 
Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma, 38-39). [See Valla’s Pro se et contra 
calumniatores ad Eugenium IV. Pont. Max. Apologia, in idem, Opera omnia, 1:799: “oratorem 
esse virum sapientem, quantum in hominem cadit: hoc est, plus esse quam philosophum 
et sophon.”] 


[PDF page 291]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 271 
designed for such an end by nature (“such that they seem to have been 
born for this very purpose”), how much more beneficial will the art of 
rhetoric be, how much greater profit will it bring, as an organic instrument 
in the service of those same divine truths (“all the more so will such be 
derived from those who are eloquent”)? 
Once again it is Valla’s very own formulations that call to mind parallels 
with and departures from Aquinas. While Thomas bases the analogic 
relationship between philosophy and theology on the ontological princi- 
ple “nature is the preamble to grace,” Valla argues for the reduction of 
thetoric to theology on the basis of a certain historical connaturality of 
artistic praxis, employed consistently throughout Christian tradition and 
civilization — ancient, medieval, and contemporary — in liturgical and aes- 
thetic service to the divine: “such that they seem to have been born for this 
very purpose.” In other words, the principle of Thomas’s analogy seems to 
be taken up by Valla and, so to speak, historicized; it is projected along the 
dimensions of a Christian civilization that had reorganized the arts for the 
service primarily not of the profane city (civitas) but of the temple of God 
(templum Dei). 
Hence the further consequence deduced by Valla: once rhetoric’s pri- 
macy among the other arts, as “perfect wisdom,” is rediscovered, and thus 
also its status as the supreme art governing all the others, it becomes a tool 
of direct and immediate use to theology, transcending the purely decora- 
tive function in the temple of God to which the other arts are limited. By 
their very nature, the other arts can only operate on a level inferior to the 
highest one, which is “perfect wisdom.” Valla’s conclusion, reached by 
continuing the line of his own counter-argument to the objection based 
on the topos of Jerome’s dream, appears to follow extremely well from the 
initial premises: 
Therefore Jerome was accused not of being a Ciceronian, but of not being a 
Christian, as he wrongly proclaimed had been the case when he scorned 
sacred literature. It was not the study of this art [rhetoric] but the dispropor- 
tionate study of this or any other art, such that no place was left for better 
ones, that was rebuked. Only Jerome was accused, not others; otherwise oth- 
ers would have been censured in a similar way.!8? 
183 Valla, Elegantiae, book IV, preface (ed. Garin), 616-618: “Quare non fuit illa accusatio 
quod ciceronianus esset Hieronymus, sed quod non christianus, qualem se falso esse 
praedicaverat, cum litteras sacras despiceret. Non studium huius artis sed nimium studium, 
sive huius artis sive alterius, ita ut locus melioribus non relinquatur, reprehensum. Non 
ceteri sed solus Hieronymus accusatus est, alioqui ceteri simili castigatione correpti 
fuissent.” 


[PDF page 292]
272 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
All that can actually be gathered from the Letter to Eustochium, Valla 
argues, is the indication, or better, the declaration of a phase or moment 
of cultural and religious crisis at this point along Jerome’s development as 
a Christian thinker. Jerome the “Ciceronian,” the worshipper of classical 
rhetoric, is no longer a thinker organic to Christianity; and Jerome the 
“Christian,” disgusted by the style of Scripture, is not yet able to under- 
stand rhetoric in its dimension as “perfect wisdom.” Jerome had arrived at 
the dramatic impasse, experiencing it with deep personal suffering, of the 
theoretical and practical opposition between pagan culture and biblical 
revelation, manifested in the dilemma of the antinomy between human 
and sacred literature (humanae litterae and sacrae litterae). Thus the 
Jerominian topos, as invoked by the anti-humanist, is in its essence an 
exemplary referent, emblematic both of and in the history of the Christian 
tradition. 
But equally emblematic, Valla immediately adds, is the solution pro- 
vided to that specific antinomy by Jerome’s own works — a solution 
embodied fully and profoundly in the interpretive task of translation and 
the exegetical task of commentary to which the Latin Father would dedi- 
cate the rest of his life. For this he becomes the greatest exponent and the 
exemplary figure in the Latin Christian tradition (much more so than the 
other Church Fathers, who had not undergone the same punishment): 
Nor did Jerome dare to prohibit others from engaging in it [the study of lit- 
erature]; on the contrary he praised the eloquence of many, from both ear- 
lier times and his own. But why talk of others? Who is more eloquent than 
Jerome himself? Who is more rhetorical? Who, although he is wont to hide 
it, is more prepared, more eager, or more careful to speak well?!84 
The sense in which Valla interpreted Jerome’s solution to the humanist 
antinomy (the problem of conscience) and the organic use of rhetoric as 
philological criticism can be highlighted by circumscribing it within a suf- 
ficiently clear frame, i.e. by connecting this passage, quoted from the pref- 
ace to the Elegantiae, to a letter sent to Giovanni Aurispa in December of 
1441. Referring to his brand-new Declamatio (1440) on the Donation of 
Constantine, Valla praises his work in terms of literary composition: 
“I have written nothing more rhetorical.”!®° Here, in a piece of private 
184 Tbid., 618: “Neque ille hoc aliis vetare ausus est ne facerent; contraque plurimos lau- 
davit tum superiorum tum suorum temporum eloquentes. Verum quid multis agimus? 
quid Hieronymo ipso eloquentius? quid magis oratorium? quid, licet ille saepe dissimulare 
velit, bene dicendi sollicitius, studiosius, observantius?” (emphasis added). 
'8S Lorenzo Valla, Epistole, ed. Ottavio Besomi and Mariangela Regoliosi (Padova: 
Antenore, 1984), 252.9192: “qua nihil magis oratorium scripsi” (emphasis added). 


[PDF page 293]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 273 
correspondence coeval with the writing of the Elegantiae, we find the 
same expression with which Valla describes the sum of Jerome’s exegetical 
work on the Old and New Testaments. 
We need not repeat what we have attempted to demonstrate elsewhere 
(and amply so, we believe) in order to interpret the description “rhetori- 
cal” (oratorium), in the letter to Aurispa, as anything other than an expres- 
sion of the very methodological principle and analytical basis on which 
the entire Declamatio was constructed. Furthermore, the term “rhetorical” 
also takes on prescriptive significance and a particular meaning within 
the system of Quintilian’s rhetoric. Specifically, it is used to describe the 
application of philological and historical analysis to a literary or diplo- 
matic text, e.g. the pseudo-Donation of Constantine.!°° In the passage of 
the Elegantiae cited above, the term “rhetorical” undoubtedly has greater 
meaning, albeit still falling within Valla’s view of Quintilian’s rhetoric, 
understood as the science of philological and historical criticism. Hence 
the description of Jerome’s work as rhetorical, meaning that it is emi- 
nently a work of rhetoric in a way that far transcends the boundaries of 
formal Ciceronian eloquence. 
What is more, Valla incorporates into the flow of his own reasoning the 
arguments that Jerome himself had used in his Contra Rufinum (Apology 
against Rufinus) when reflecting on the subject of his “censure” as 
recounted in the Letter to Eustochium. “When Rufinus reminds him of the 
dream,” Valla recalls, 
[Jerome] ridicules him and openly acknowledges eagerly reading the works 
of the pagans and says that they ought to be read eagerly; and yet this is clear 
in many other passages, even without his confession, and especially in the 
Letter to the Orator Magnus.!87 
It must first of all be noted that Valla’s argumentative line regarding “the 
censure of Jerome,” a reference that had been cited throughout history by 
those opposed to philosophy and literature, actually follows a traditional 
186 Cf, Salvatore J. Camporeale, “Giovanni Tolosani, O.P. e la teologia antiumanistica 
agl’inizi della Riforma. L’Opusculum antivalliano De Constantini Donatione,” in Xenia Medii 
Aevi historiam illustrantia oblata Thomae Kaeppeli, eds. Raymundus Creytens and Pius 
Kiinzle (Roma: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 1978), 809-831. [See also the discussion of 
the term oratorium in idem, “Lorenzo Valla and the De falso credita donatione: Rhetoric, 
Freedom, and Ecclesiology in the Fifteenth Century,” on pp. 27 and 143 of this volume. Eds. ] 
187 Valla, Elegantiae, book IV, preface (ed. Garin), 618: “Obiciente sibi hoc somnium 
Rufino hominem deridet planeque fatetur se lectitare opera gentilium et lectitare debere, 
idque cum in aliis multis locis, qaamquam etiam sine confessione palam est, tum vero 
epistola illa Ad Magnum oratorem.” 


[PDF page 294]
274 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
interpretation. The parallelism with Thomas’s own procedure in the 
Commentary on Boethius is obvious enough, although Valla exhibits pecu- 
liarities that we have already had occasion to point out. For example, his 
references to the individual passages in Jerome are undergirded by a more 
precisely philological interpretation. And of course, the two men aim their 
arguments at different objectives: Thomas at the defense of philosophy, 
Valla at the critique and overcoming of philosophy in favor of rhetoric. 
But to move from general considerations to more detailed observations, 
close attention must be given to Valla’s reference to the controversy 
between Jerome and Rufinus. As is clear not only from the Contra Rufinum 
but also from parallel passages in Jerome’s letters, this reference points 
directly to the key question of the entire controversy, namely the prob- 
lematic of the opposition between Christian language and literature, 
which underlies Jerome’s work on scriptural exegesis. Nor does Valla omit 
to mention Jerome’s ironic response to Rufinus’ admonitions: 
You require of me in my sleep what you have never done in your waking 
hours. Am I guilty of a great crime if I said that girls and virgins of Christ 
should not read secular books and, when warned in a dream, promised not 
to read them myself?}88 
Valla connects the reference from the Contra Rufinum to the pertinent 
passage in the Letter to Magnus, which was the other traditional topos for 
combating those who maintained the absolute incompatibility between 
the love of Sacred Scripture and the study of literature. As mentioned 
above, the Letter to Magnus was the counter-citation to the Letter to 
Eustochium, i.e. to the topos of the dream in which Jerome was condemned 
for Ciceronianism.}®9 
At this point, Valla is in a good position to reject all reductive interpreta- 
tions of Jerome’s corpus. The utilization of Greek and Roman literature in 
Jerome’s hermeneutical work is so abundant and consistent that it cannot 
be traced to any sort of sedimentation from his early school days. All of his 
188 Jerome, Contra Rufinum, bk. Ill, ch. 32: PL 23:481: “te exigere a dormiente quod 
numquam vigilans praestitisti. Magni criminis reus sum, si puellis et virginibus Christi dixi 
saeculares libros non legendos et me in somniis commonitum promisisse ne legerem?”; 
but see also bk. I, chs. 30-31: PL 23:421-424. 
189 For an overview of Jerome’s biblical exegesis and the controversies in which he was 
involved, see Angelo Penna, Principie caratteri dell’esegesi di S. Girolamo (Roma: Pontificio 
Istituto Biblico, 1950); E.F. Sutcliffe, “Jerome,” in The Cambridge History of the Bible, 3 vols. 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1963-1970), vol. II (ed. G.W.H. Lampe, 1969), 
80-101; and ibid., vol. I (eds. P.R. Ackroyd and C.F. Evans, 1970), 510-541; J.N.D. Kelly, Jerome: 
His Life, Writings, and Controversies (London: Duckworth, 1975). 


[PDF page 295]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 275 
exegetical work on the Old and New Testaments stands as a constant wit- 
ness to the compossibility between the organic use of pagan culture and 
the philological interpretation of Sacred Scripture. This fact is of great 
importance, as it clearly implies a continuous, ever-deepening familiarity 
with and study of classical literature. Valla emphasizes that Jerome “often 
adduced pagan books as witnesses.” And he immediately adds, with spe- 
cial reference to his anti-humanist interlocutor, 
if it is not permitted to read pagan books, certainly less so is it to show that 
they must be read; and if he were to dissuade us from reading them — which 
he does not do — I would think it more necessary to pay attention to what he 
himself does than to what he says others should do.!9° 
Valla continues: once Jerome decided to devote his efforts to the study of 
Sacred Scripture (which he had earlier scorned), he began reading pagan 
authors again with equal seriousness, “either to acquire their eloquence or 
to condemn their false opinions while approving their correct ones.”!9! 
Actually — Valla goes on — all Jerome did was to continue along a trail 
already blazed in the past, namely the early tradition of the Eastern and 
Western Church Fathers. Indeed, Jerome himself testifies to this often, 
especially in his letters. Valla identifies the particular authors as “Hilary, 
Ambrose, Augustine, Lactantius, Basil, Gregory, Chrysostom” — the same 
names that would crop up again in the Encomium. At the end of this list he 
immediately adds: “and very many others who in every age adorned the 
precious gems of divine utterance with the gold and silver of eloquence.” 
To Valla’s mind, Jerome’s exegetical work, as well as the dominant, most 
significant part of the Greek and Latin patristic tradition, offers definitive 
and irrefutable proof of the compossibility between classical literature 
and Sacred Scripture, between Greco-Roman rhetoric and doctrinal study. 
Indeed, the great Greek and Latin Fathers saw no insoluble antinomy 
between the scientific disciplines of rhetoric and theology: “they did [not] 
abandon one science on account of the other.”!%” 
190 Valla, Elegantiae, book IV, preface (ed. Garin), 618: “Quid quod libros gentilium 
saepe in testimonium assumit? Quod si non licet legere, minus profecto legendos exhi- 
bere; et si nos dehortaretur a lectione gentilium — quod non facit — magis intuendum puta- 
rem quid ipse ageret quam quid agendum aliis diceret.” 
191 [bid., 620: “sive ut illinc eloquentiam mutuaretur sive ut illorum, bene dicta probans, 
male dicta reprehenderet.” 
192 Tbid., 620: “Hilarius, Gregorius, Chrysostomus aliique plurimi qui in omni aetate 
praetiosas illas divini eloquii gemmas auro argentoque eloquentiae vestierunt, neque 
alteram propter alteram scientiam reliquerunt.” 


[PDF page 296]
276 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
4.4. The Opposition between Philosophical Theology and Rhetorical 
Theology, and the Critical Reduction of the Vulgate to the Greek Truth 
(veritas graeca) 
Having answered the objections of his adversary, by means of both ad 
hominem arguments and appeals to authority (ex auctoritate), Valla can 
now move on to the enunciation of his own thesis. This is his definitive 
response — “my view” — to his anti-humanist interlocutor, the crucial and 
defining premise for the final and most important part of the preface to 
book IV of the Elegantiae. 
But in my view, if someone undertakes to write about theology, it matters 
little whether he brings to it some other study or not, be it canon law or geom- 
etry or medicine or philosophy. For they contribute more or less nothing. But 
if he is ignorant of eloquence, I think he is utterly unworthy to talk about 
theology. And without a doubt only the eloquent, like those I mentioned, 
are the pillars of the church. And this was the case going all the way back to 
the apostles, among whom Paul seems to me to stand out for nothing other 
than his eloquence.!93 
Valla’s thesis makes a distinction between the disciplines (named in the 
manuscript variant in italics) that remain marginal to the sacred science 
(scientia sacra) of theology, on the one hand, and rhetoric, on the other, 
which is instead a tool and an integral part of theological study. He also 
bases his thesis on the grand patristic tradition. What is more, he connects 
this tradition in a direct and continuous line to the preaching of the apos- 
tolic church (out of which it in fact grew) and, above all, to Paul’s writings. 
Here it is clear that Valla’s Paulinism, prescribed as a specific mode of the- 
ologizing in the Encomium of 1457, constitutes the maturation of an essen- 
tial characteristic dating back to the 1430s and 1440s and is thus rooted in 
his greatest rhetorical work: the Elegantiae. 
In contrast to the rather defensive tone that had characterized his argu- 
ment so far, Valla now wholly inverts the anti-humanist thesis — it, too, a 
constant element in the development and cultural life of the Church’s his- 
tory, and one that had nearly run parallel to the dominant tradition of the 
193 Tbid., 620 (italicized section is a variant found in ms. Florence, Bibl. Laur., Conv. 
soppr. 187, f. 6or): “At mea quidem sententia, si quis ad scribendum in theologia accedat 
parvi refert an aliam aliquam facultatem, sive canonum sive geometriam sive medicinam sive 
philosophiam afferat an non afferat. Nihil enim fere conferunt. At qui ignarus eloquentiae 
est, hunc indignum prorsus qui de theologia loquatur existimo. Et certe soli eloquentes, 
quales ii quos enumeravi, columnae ecclesiae sunt. Etiam ut ab Apostolis usque repetas, 
inter quos mihi Paulus nulla alia re eminere quam eloquentia videtur.” 


[PDF page 297]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 277 
Eastern and Western Church Fathers. On the basis of his earlier references 
to the Fathers and the New Testament writings of the Apostles, he insists, 
“So you see how the exact opposite conclusion is reached: it is not study- 
ing eloquence that must be rebuked, but not studying it.”1%4 
In Valla’s work, and perhaps for the first time ever — as Poggio clearly 
understood and wrote in his Invectivae in L. Vallam (Invectives against 
Lorenzo Valla) in the early 1450s — the overcoming of the antinomy 
between rhetoric and theology becomes the epistemological foundation 
for anew, specifically humanist perspective on biblical and ecclesiological 
study. Valla depicts the humanist principle of rhetorical theology as a 
recovery both of the mode of theologizing underlying the apostolic 
Scriptures (especially those of Paul) and of the epistemological basis of 
the whole patristic tradition. Indeed, on this count it should be noted that 
scholasticism — to which rhetorical theology was radically opposed — was 
not able (and never tried) to raise consistent arguments for the defense 
and elaboration of its own philosophical theology on the basis of this kind 
of New Testament scriptural authority. 
Even more illuminating is Valla’s clarification, following directly upon 
the last passage cited: 
Iam acting as if I were offering a defense of eloquence against its detractors, 
which is more than I intended. For our object is not this but to write about 
the elegance of the Latin language, which nevertheless acts as a stepping 
stone to eloquence itself. If someone is not eloquent, he should not be cen- 
sured if he was unequal to the task and did not shun the work involved. But 
whoever does not know how to speak elegantly and yet commits his 
thoughts to writing, especially in theology, is utterly shameless. And if he 
says that he does so deliberately, he is completely out of his mind.19° 
Thus Valla defines more precisely the function of “elegance” (elegantia), a 
theme which here is treated apologetically in the context of the dispute 
over literature and is derived from a precise theological tradition. But at 
the same time, Valla also intends to justify the place of this preface (to 
book IV) in the context of the Elegantiae as a whole. 
194 [bid., 620: “Vides igitur ut in contrarium res ipsa recidit. Non modo non reprehen- 
dum est studere eloquentiae, verum etiam reprehendum non studere.” 
195 Tbid., 620: “Et ego sic ago tamquam eloquentiae contra calumniantes patrocinium 
praestem, quod est maius proposito meo. Non enim de hac, sed de elegantia linguae lati- 
nae scribimus, ex qua tamen gradus fit ad ipsam eloquentiam. Verum si quis eloquens non 
sit, ita demum non erit castigandus: si talis non potuit evadere, non si hunc laborem effu- 
git. Qui vero eleganter loqui nescit, et cogitationes suas litteris mandat, in theologia prae- 
sertim, impudentissimus est; et si id consulto facere se ait, insanissimus.” 


[PDF page 298]
278 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Indeed, the object of the linguistic treatment of “elegance” was in no 
way to consider, much less focus on, the study of classical literature in its 
various relations with theology. On the contrary, the Elegantiae was aimed 
directly at the “cultivators of the Roman tongue” (cultores romanae lin- 
guae) and “those most eager to speak well” (bene loquendi studiosissimi), 
as Valla often repeats throughout the work. Its intention was to offer an 
analytical and methodological tool for effecting what Quintilian had 
called (following Cicero’s terminology) the “embellishment” (exornatio) 
of speaking and writing: “the wondrous elegance of [Latin] speech.”!9° The 
Elegantiae was thus on the one hand a study of the grammatical and syn- 
tactical composition of the Latin language (morphology of the partes ora- 
tionis, or parts of speech), and on the other an analysis of that language’s 
semantic structure (the investigation of verborum significatio, or the 
meaning of words). 
But beyond the immediate substance of the Elegantiae and its complex 
articulation, which called for its subdivision into six books, Valla’s work 
aimed directly at recovering the discipline of grammar (litteratura), in 
both the ‘methodological’ and ‘historical’ dimensions that constitute 
“grammar according to Quintilian” as opposed to “grammar according to 
Priscian.” As can also be confirmed on the basis of other texts by Valla 
(parallel to the Elegantiae), the specific objective was the typically human- 
ist one of transcending medieval speculative grammar, the function of 
which was essentially normative and prescriptive. In sum, with the 
Elegantiae Valla restored to grammar (ars grammaticalis), in a formative 
turn for post-medieval linguistics, an epistemological principle which can 
properly be defined as the doctrine of the fundamentals of the science of 
language.!9” 
By stating that his treatment of the “elegance of the Latin language” was 
restricted to a level preliminary to the science of rhetoric, one that was “a 
stepping stone on the way to eloquence itself,” Valla was actually echoing 
196 Quintilian, Institutio oratoria X.1.114: “mira sermonis [latini] ... elegantia.” 
197 Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 101-108. But for the general theme 
of this fourth part of our essay, see first of all Charles Trinkaus, Jn Our Image and Likeness. 
Humanity and Divinity in Italian Humanist Thought, 2 vols. (London: Constable, 1970), in 
particular vol. I, ch. 3: “Lorenzo Valla: voluptas et fruitio, verba et res” (pp. 103-170). This is 
the source of the expression “rhetorical theology,” (pp. 142f. and pp. 126-128), which we 
have applied to the context of Valla’s Quintilianism. One should also keep in mind 
Trinkaus’s observations (pp. 136ff., esp. 150-170) on chapter 12, book III of De vero falsoque 
bono, which we have already discussed. Finally, on Valla’s use of philology in the service of 
theology, Trinkaus speaks at length in vol. II, ch. 12: “Italian Humanism and the Scriptures” 
(pp. 563-614), esp. 571-578. 


[PDF page 299]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 279 
Quintilian’s concept of grammar as the foundation of rhetoric. So much is 
clear from chapter 1, book II of the Institutio, where this conception of 
grammar is specifically discussed and explained (obviously within the 
larger context of book II). This section of Quintilian was decisive for Valla’s 
linguistic analysis and, before that, for his own understanding and defini- 
tion of rhetoric as philological criticism. On the other hand, it is precisely 
on the basis of Quintilian’s conception of grammar (as an integral part of 
and the structural basis for rhetoric) that Valla extends his discourse here 
from rhetoric’s general function in theology to the relations (even more 
fundamental and inescapable) between the art of grammar and theologi- 
cal language. 
Methodological positions and polemical accents emerge here that Valla 
would take up again in other places, especially in his exegesis of the Greek 
and Latin New Testament in the Collatio of 1443 and then in the 
Adnotationes of the 1450s. Once again he would raise his steady accusation 
of those who refused to admit that theology, precisely because it is a sci- 
ence, must “submit to the rules of grammar.”!98 But above all he would 
show by the example of his own scriptural exegesis how elegance should 
be transposed, or better, extended from secular to sacred literature: that 
is, he provided a model for critical philology’s decisive turn from classical 
literature to New Testament scripture. 
Theological argument based its premises on biblical language. And 
since it, like every other language, fell within the specific sphere of gram- 
mar, theology could not escape the problematics dictated by the 
grammatical art. Specifically, since New Testament revelation had been 
historically written down in the standard tongues of Greece and Rome, 
theological study had to confront the same issue with which the analytical 
study of classical literature had already come to grips and to which 
Quintilian’s grammar had given a specifically linguistic perspective: the 
structural difference between the Greek and Latin languages. 
Hence Valla’s specifically theological problem: the linguistic difference, 
in the editorial transmission of the Old and New Testament scriptures, 
between the Latin Vulgate and the “Greek truth” (veritas graeca) of the 
original text, and consequently the attempt semantically to reduce the 
former to the latter. For Valla, this problem of biblical exegesis fell 
within the broader context of the relationship between Greek and Latin 
198 [Lorenzo Valla, Adnotationes in Novum Testamentum, “In Mattheum 4,” in idem, 
Opera omnia, 1:808: “quamquam sint qui negent theologiam inservire praeceptis artis 
grammaticae.”] 


[PDF page 300]
280 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
literature and culture (both Christian and non-Christian). It would find 
pointed expression in the opening pages of the Collatio/Adnotationes, but 
it would be defined, both generally and specifically, in the preface to the 
Latin translation of Thucydides: 
What is more useful, more productive, or more necessary than the transla- 
tion of books? It seems to me to be a kind of commerce in the best arts. 
I compare it to a great thing when I say it is like commerce. For what is more 
advantageous for human affairs than that which provides everything per- 
taining to nourishment, cultivation, defense, decoration, and finally, to the 
delights of life, such that nothing may ever be lacking and everything may 
everywhere be in abundance? And what is said to have been the case in the 
golden age, namely that all things were somehow in common for all people, 
holds equally for the translation of languages, except that translation is 
more distinguished, since the goods of the mind are preferable to those of 
the body. For this traffic in translation supplies us with things that nourish, 
decorate, strengthen and delight our souls, nearly making them more divine. 
What is more pleasant, more salutary, more worthy of love — in a word, bet- 
ter — than the books that are translated into our own language from Greek, 
Hebrew, Chaldaean, or Punic, whether of historians, orators, poets, philoso- 
phers, doctors, or theologians? We Latins would not even have commerce 
with God if the Old Testament had not been translated from Hebrew and 
the New from Greek. We would need more time than is available here to 
give a full praise of translation ....!99 
The particular theme expressed in this passage, to which our analysis of 
the preface to book IV of the Elegantiae also brought us, is directly echoed 
in a quotation we encountered earlier in the Encomium: “the nature 
of Greek is different from that of Latin. This would be a rather tedious 
subject to discuss, and it is a question for another time.” It thus seems 
199 Valla, Oraciones y Prefacios, 278-280: “Quid utilius, quid uberius, quid etiam magis 
necessarium librorum interpretatione? Ut haec mihi mercatura quaedam optimarum 
artium esse videatur. Magnae rei eam comparo, cum mercaturae comparo: quid enim illa 
in rebus humanis conducibilius quae omnia ad victum, ad cultum, ad praesidium, ad orna- 
mentum, ad delitias denique vitae pertinentia comportat, ut nihil usquam desit, omnia 
ubique abundent? Et quod in aureo saeculo fuisse fertur, sint cunctoram quodammodo 
cuncta communia. Idem fit in translatione linguarum, sed tanto praeclarius quanto potiora 
sunt bona mentis corporis bonis; siquidem ex rebus, quas ista transferendi negotiatio 
nobis apportat, animi aluntur, vestiuntur, roborantur, delectantur ac prope diviniores 
efficiuntur, Nam quid suavius, salubrius, amabilius et, ut uno complectar verbo melius 
quam libri qui vel e graeca vel ex hebraea vel e chaldaica punicave lingua in nostram 
traducuntur, sive historicorum sive oratorum sive poetarum sive philosophorum sive 
medicorum sive theologorum? Adeo nullum cum Deo nos latini commercium habere- 
mus, nisi Testamentum Vetus ex hebraeo et Novum e graeco foret traductum. Longiore 
opus esset oratione quam ut huic tempori conveniret ad omnes laudes interpretationis 
exsequendas ....” 


[PDF page 301]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 281 
appropriate to dedicate the next section of our essay to this subject. This 
interlude will serve to tie together, by way of a comparative reading, the 
variations and repetitions of this theme contained in the Encomium of 
St. Thomas, in the introduction to the Latin translation of Thucydides, and 
in the preface to book IV of the Elegantiae. Thereupon we will return in 
the subsequent section to our analysis of the Elegantiae.2© 
4.5. The Preface to Thucydides’ History, Nicholas V’s Literary Project, and 
the Question of “Translation”: Translation (translatio linguarum) as 
Commerce (mercatura rerum) 
The long passage just cited constitutes the most important part of the 
praise of translation contained in the preface to Valla’s Latin version of 
Thucydides’ History, commissioned by Nicholas V and finished in the 
summer of 1452. The preface praises the humanist pope (to whom it is 
addressed as a dedicatory letter) for having set aside a whole sector of his 
planned Vatican Library to Latin translations of Greek classical and patris- 
tic texts. This is Valla’s cue, which he views as a golden opportunity, to 
treat the complex question of translation and express his thoughts fully on 
the subject. Indeed, Valla seeks here to define the philological activity of 
translation and to praise it, especially with regard to the Greco-Hellenistic 
and Semitic-Eastern literary patrimonies, as one of the greatest contribu- 
tions to contemporary Latin culture, in every branch of sacred and pro- 
fane knowledge. It is known that the subject of translation was variously 
raised and discussed in the Middle Ages, from Boethius to Albert the 
Great. Here Valla takes it up — with his mention of Nicholas V’s project — in 
a specifically humanist way. On the one hand he sees languages and lin- 
guistic differences as historically different and semantically alternative 
cultural spaces. On the other he conceives of translation as a kind of 
“traffic” (transferendi negotiatio): a general exchange and circulation of 
handmade goods and products. 
Valla could not have chosen a comparison more meaningful for his con- 
temporaries, and especially for the adherents to the new humanist cul- 
ture, than that adduced in this praise of translation. The comparison 
relates — in an almost analogical way, beyond a simple metaphorical 
200 The text of the preface to the translation of Thucydides’ History is available in Valla, 
Oraciones y Prefacios, 278-289, but see also 74-75 of Adorno’s introduction (to the anthol- 
ogy). Adorno’s entire essay (78 pp. with an invaluable bibliography) is still an excellent 
piece of scholarship on Valla’s work as a whole. 


[PDF page 302]
282 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
connection — the philological operation of translation (interpretatio) to 
the activity of commerce (mercatura). Both are defined as arts (artes) 
whose similarity to one another stems from their incredibly intense con- 
temporary flourishing, and as activities aimed at transcending geographic 
and linguistic borders, at the creation of interrelations between different 
communities and societies. That is, they operate in spatial and temporal 
dimensions beyond every impediment and boundary; their aim is to facili- 
tate civil society and intercourse in human language. 
Commerce channels and puts into circulation, for the purpose of proper 
distribution, every sort of good necessitated by civil society and social 
interaction. By the exigencies and market conditions of supply and 
demand, and through the mechanism of buying and selling, products 
enter into commercial circulation according to their multiple and multi- 
form needs and uses (“everything pertaining to nourishment, cultivation, 
defense, decoration, and finally, to the delights of life”). Through com- 
merce an attempt is made to return to complete and universal well-being 
(“such that nothing may be lacking and everything may everywhere be in 
abundance’), i.e. to the community of goods, as if with a view to the recov- 
ery of that mythical “golden age” in which all goods were available to one 
and all according to need (“all things were somehow in common for all 
people’). 
The praise of commerce, which was not foreign (even if tangential) to 
the mercantile ideology inherent in the humanist view of contemporary 
civil and political society, merges into the exaltation of literary transla- 
tion. This, too, consists in “traffic,” although here it concerns a much more 
noble commodity: “translation is more distinguished, since the goods of 
the mind are preferable to those of the body.” Undertaken for the satisfac- 
tion of the mind, this kind of linguistic exchange of writings hailing from 
every branch of knowledge, from every literary form and cultural context, 
aids in educating and nourishing the human spirit, “almost making [it] 
more divine.” And we Latins — Valla now concludes, with a statement in 
which all the analogical tensions and resonances of liturgical language in 
his discourse converge — we Christians of the Western Church “would not 
even have commerce with God” if not for the Latin translation of the Old 
Testament from Hebrew and of the New Testament form Greek (espe- 
cially in the form of the Vulgate). 
Against the background of the analogical relationship between com- 
merce (mercatura rerum) and translation (translatio linguarum) that 
underlies the articulation of Valla’s argument, Quintilian’s conception of 
“language” as a primary function of exchange in social life emerges. 


[PDF page 303]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 283 
Language, in Quintilian’s view, as a mechanism and instrument of 
exchange in human interrelations, as a social institution of communica- 
tion, is similar to a monetary system in continuous circulation, structured 
(by custom) according to relationships of relative value. “Language,” 
Quintilian writes in the fundamental chapter 4, book I of the Institutio, “is 
to be used like money: as common currency.”20! 
The Quintilianesque comparison of language to money portrays both, 
according to a strict analogic parallelism, as institutional instruments of 
communication and exchange, as social mechanisms of cultural and com- 
mercial transactions — and not only within one community but also 
between communities speaking different languages and engaging in dif- 
ferent kinds of commerce. This extremely dense metaphor leads Valla to 
the specific angle from which he views the act of translating texts belong- 
ing to culturally different spaces. The translator’s activity is seen as part of 
the quest for and the broadening of political rule, as the intellectual dupli- 
cate of commercial and financial expansion. As a philological praxis, 
translation is actualized through the collection and “importation” of bib- 
liographic material from every part of the world. As such, this recovery 
and reading of the literary, historical, and scientific texts of other peoples 
presupposes a basic motive: the will to make one’s own language domi- 
nant. It aims to assimilate the cultures of other civilizations, past and pres- 
ent, and somehow to bring them within the sphere of one’s own linguistic 
community. Likewise, the expansion of commercial and _ financial 
exchange involves the imposition of one’s own coinage as the dominant 
one, almost as a standard currency. This is exactly what was happening 
with Florence’s currency through the development and expansion of the 
Medici bank under the direction of Cosimo and his collaborators. 
Especially in the years in which Valla was completing his Latin translation 
of Thucydides and its accompanying dedicatory letter, the florin was 
establishing itself on the commercial routes of Europe and in the more 
important financial centers across the Alps and, before that, in Italy (start- 
ing right in Nicholas V’s Rome). 
Valla elaborates his praise of Nicholas V’s literary project — “quite a 
magnificent undertaking” of high culture, “unique and worthy of the 
201 [Institutio oratoria, 1.6.3: “Consuetudo certissima est loquendi magistra, uten- 
dumque plane sermone ut nummo, cui publica forma est.”] Cf. the references to Latin 
authors (Aulus Gellius, Ulpian, Caesar, etc.) with which Valla glossed Quintilian’s passage 
in ms. Paris, Bibl. Nat., lat. 7723, f. 10v. [See also the discussion of this metaphor in 
Camporeale, “Lorenzo Valla and the De falso credita donatione,” on pp. 95-96 in this 
volume. | 


[PDF page 304]
284 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
wisdom’ of the patron of the humanists? — along the parallels and con- 
trasts of a series of significant comparisons and assimilations: commerce/ 
translation (mercatura rerum|translatio linguarum), language/money (lin- 
gua/nummus), “traffic in translation/transfer into Latin” (transferendi 
negotiatio/in latinum traductio), etc. With this project, was the Pope not 
extending, in breadth and depth, his Roman Empire (imperium romanum), 
but in such a way that his hegemony would be different from that of the 
ancient emperors? Certainly he expressed his will to conquer differently 
from Augustus, Antoninus, and the other Roman emperors.?°3 He did so in 
accordance with the specific character of his rule as a Christian Pope: 
through your own person you see to sacred things, religion, divine and 
human laws, and the peace, greatness, and welfare of the Latin world. But to 
others, especially us, you have assigned other tasks, sending us off as your 
prefects, tribunes, and captains, expert in both languages, to subject as 
much of Greece as possible to your rule, that is, to translate Greek books into 
Latin for you.2 
In this sense, Valla resolves Nicholas V’s grand project — later described as 
“ensuring the translation of the Greek books that are left” — in a cultural 
logistic that is peculiarly humanist and different from the ancient one, 
which was preeminently military although not dissimilar in its geographic 
expanse or in the ethno-linguistic space at which it aimed. Its strategy of 
cultural retaking and reconquest aimed at bringing the Greco-Oriental 
world of the ancient empire back within the boundaries of Christian 
Rome: “adding Asia ..., Macedonia ..., the rest of Greece to the Roman 
empire.”° Here it should be emphasized that Valla’s preface —- composed 
in August of 1452, on the eve of the fall of Constantinople (May 29, 1453) — 
is doubtless informed by an anxious concern, one that was by then felt 
throughout the humanist world of Europe but that could be sensed ever 
202 Valla, Oraciones y prefacios, 278: “Propositum sane magnificum singulare et vere 
summo pontifice sapiente dignum.” 
203 [The precise identity of “Antoninus” is unclear. It could theoretically refer to any of 
the Antonine emperors, but the most likely candidates are Antoninus Pius (ruled 138-161), 
who enjoyed a peaceful reign and administered the provinces indirectly from Rome 
through his governors, and Marcus Aurelius (ruled 161-180), who ruled over an empire of 
great extent and prosecuted many wars in the provinces. Eds. ] 
204 Valla, Oraciones y prefacios, 278: “cum sacra, religionem, divina atque humana iura, 
pacem, amplitudinem, salutem latini orbis per te ipsum cures, mandasti cum alia aliis tum 
vero nobis, quasi tuis praefectis, tribunis, ducibus, utriusque linguae peritis, ut omnem, 
quoad possemus, Graeciam tuae dicioni subiceremus, idest ut graecos tibi libros in lati- 
num traduceremus.” 
205 Tbid., 282: “non minus tibi gloriosum est, romane pontifex, libros graecos, qui reliqui 
sunt, transferendos curare quam aut Asiam aut Macedoniam aut ceteram Graeciam 
romano adicere imperio.” 


[PDF page 305]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 285 
since the Council of Florence (1430s): the desire fully to salvage the remain- 
ing literary patrimony, both classical and patristic, of ancient, Hellenistic, 
and Byzantine Greece. 
From what we have observed, it seems clear that in the preface to 
Thucydides’ History Valla was revisiting the grammatical problem of the 
relationship between Greek and Latin ina manner informed by Quintilian’s 
view of philology. And indeed, the “traffic in translation” planned and 
organized by Nicholas V caused Valla to reconsider the complex operation 
of translation as a philological, theoretical, and practical problem of vital 
importance. This was a most important issue in philology, one that had 
not only been present in Valla’s writings but that had constituted a nodal 
and structural point for the convergence of a complex and diverse series 
of literary, philosophical, and theological problems. Such emerges clearly 
and on various levels, particularly in the Disputationes and De vero fal- 
soque bono, on the plane of grammatical analysis, in the terminological 
and categorical exegesis of Aristotelian and scholastic logic, metaphysics, 
and ethics, and in linguistic and conceptual questions surrounding 
Trinitarian terminology. The statement in the Encomium of St. Thomas — 
because the nature of Greek is different from that of Latin. This would be a 
rather tedious subject to discuss, and it is a question for another time 
— actually made reference, although only obliquely, to the persistent prob- 
lematic that is at the heart of Valla’s entire oeuvre. In that simple, allusive 
formulation, Valla seems to have wanted to compress the long labor nec- 
essary for an adequate solution, as well as to temper his discontent at the 
lack of one. 
But by calling attention, in the same preface to Thucydides, to the prob- 
lem of Scripture — “We Latins would not even have commerce with God if 
the Old Testament had not been translated from Hebrew and the New 
from Greek” — Valla raised the “traffic in translation” to a philological 
question of theological grammar. Here the “transaction” between the 
Latin of the Vulgate and the “Greek truth” (veritas graeca) of the New 
Testament (and the “Hebrew truth” of the Old, to use Jerome’s phrase) 
involved — by returning it to its beginnings — the theological and dogmatic, 
ecclesiological and liturgical question of Judeo-Christian revelation. 
In this way Valla inserted into Nicholas V’s project — exalted throughout 
the entire introduction to his translation of Thucydides — the scriptural, 
philological, and theological question on which he himself had concen- 
trated in his unpublished Collatio Novi Testamenti. Composed in 1443, dur- 
ing his early Neapolitan period, the Collatio would be publicly circulated 


[PDF page 306]
286 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
in the same years as the Latin translation of the History, and in 1453 Valla 
dedicated it, too, to Nicholas V. He would subsequently return to the 
Collatio, reconsidering and reworking the whole text for a second edition, 
this time under the title Adnotationes in Novum Testamentum. 
Scripture, then, was for Valla the original setting for “commerce with 
God’ and the space in which that “commerce” had its specific foundation. 
Scripture was the literary source from which Valla drew his theological 
problematic, which turned out to be essentially a hermeneutic investiga- 
tion. Thus Valla’s theological critique of scholasticism reached its culmi- 
nation. He redirected his own basic arguments and made them converge 
on a radical objective, reframing his critique as philological criticism 
within the biblical space of the Old and New Testaments. He aimed at 
nothing less than the transcendence of the Vulgate, from which theology 
took its scriptural premises, and the reconstruction, through the exegesis 
of the “Greek truth” (veritas graeca), of new, more pristine and authentic 
premises for an alternative language of theology. Hence also Valla’s other 
decisive undertaking, chronologically the last but still fundamental to his 
work: the critico-philological re-examination of Thomist exegesis as the 
focal point of a more proper critique of scholastic theology. Returning the 
Vulgate to the “Greek truth” through the linguistic and categorical critique 
of Thomas’s theologico-scholastic exegesis was the specific operation, 
both methodological and substantial, of Valla’s humanist theology; and 
the revision of the Collatio in the 1450s, which would eventually result in 
the Adnotationes in Novum Testamentum, acted as the pivot for that 
operation. 
A reading of the Adnotationes that directly correlates Valla’s philologi- 
cal analysis of the New Testament with Thomas’s exegetical Commentary 
permits the reconstruction of the supporting axis of that operation, under- 
taken by Valla as a direct alternative to scholastic theology. Even if the 
Adnotationes must indubitably be considered as the end of an incredibly 
laborious journey that began with De vero falsoque bono and passed 
through the Disputationes and the Elegantiae, it achieves full meaning on 
its own. It stands as the greatest and fullest expression of that humanist 
theology which Valla described in abridged and nearly concentric formu- 
las in the Encomium of 1457.2°° 
206 See La caduta di Costantinopoli, ed. and tr. Agostino Pertusi, 2 vols. (Verona: 
Mondadori, 1976). This important collection, fastidiously and perceptively furnished with 
an introduction and notes by Pertusi, could be supplemented with further witnesses from 
the correspondence of other contemporary humanists. Concerning the cultural function 


[PDF page 307]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 287 
4.6. The Arts and Sciences as a Middle Ground (medietas): Valla’s Solution 
to the Relationship between Literature and Theology 
The study of eloquence, from the level of grammar to that of rhetoric 
proper; the study of morphology and syntax, from the stylistic function of 
ornamentation (ornatus) to the hermeneutical and linguistic techniques 
that are most elaborated and raised to the level of a system in Quintilian’s 
work — these are the elements that make up the supporting arch of human- 
ist theology. It is this conclusion which Valla reaches with the final pas- 
sage of the preface to book IV of the Elegantiae, whose terms and 
formulations seem to leave no room for interpretive doubt. 
The language of the pagans, Valla affirms, has every possibility of being 
incorporated into Christian language. It is necessary, however, to respect 
the integrity, the valences of meaning, and the syntactical relationships 
that are proper and specific to that language. Through a grammatical cri- 
teriology and a rhetoric of theology and Scripture, even the language of 
the pagans can become a preliminary object of study for the theologian. 
and theoretical conception of “translation,” it should be noted that Valla discusses them, 
both here (in the preface to the Thucydides) and elsewhere (e.g., in the Adnotationes), in a 
manner quite similar to Jerome, Epistola ad Pammachium, ep. 57 (“de optimo genere inter- 
pretandi”) in PL 22:568-579. On Valla’s “translation” and biblical exegesis, see Camporeale, 
Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 172-192 and 277ff. For a comparative reading of 
Aquinas’s exegetical commentary on Scripture with Valla’s Adnotationes, see the appendix 
to the original Italian version of this essay in Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 7 (1976), 149-194 
[reprinted in Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma, 266-330]. 
There we have limited ourselves to a comparison of their exegeses of St. Paul’s letters: 
Thomas Aquinas, Super Epistolas s. Pauli lectura, 2 vols. (Torino: Marietti, 1953) (cited by 
page and paragraph number for each Bible passage); Valla, Opera omnia, 1:803b-895b. We 
have collated the text of the Adnotationes, published by Erasmus in 1505 at the Parisian 
press of Josse Bade (cf. Ph. Renouard, Bibliographie des impressions et des oeuvres de J. 
Badius Ascensius imprimeur et humaniste: 1462-1535, 3 vols. | Paris: E. Paul et fils et Guillemin, 
1908], 3:344-345) with ms. Brussels, Bibl. Royale, 4031-4033 (cf. J. van den Gheyn, “Nicolas 
Maniacoria, correcteur de la Bible,” Revue Biblique 8 [1899]: 289-295), which contains the 
Adnotationes on ff. 37r-122r. Returning to what was said in Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla. 
Umanesimo e teologia, 25, we would now clarify that the variants between the Brussels ms. 
and the text of Erasmus’s edition are not always of a formal nature. A lacuna, for example, 
in the Brussels ms. (which is noted in our appendix), in addition to various other consider- 
ations, might indicate that Erasmus relied on a different manuscript tradition of Valla’s 
work from the one represented in the Brussels ms. And now one final observation regard- 
ing the appendix. The comparison between Valla’s (extremely short) commentary and 
Thomas’s (much fuller) one is not meant exclusively to emphasize the former's critique of 
the latter. It intends, rather, to offer a list of biblical passages in which different methodolo- 
gies, interpretations, and perspectives can be readily compared, and which thus clearly 
shows (to our point of view) how much distance separates — in both philological technique 
and theological study — the humanist of the fifteenth century from the great scholastic of 
the thirteenth. 


[PDF page 308]
288 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
To the ancient and contemporary objection, “it is not proper for Christians 
to speak the way that pagans did,”2°” Valla responds: 
Not the language of the pagans, not the grammar, not the rhetoric, not the 
dialectic, nor the other arts are to be condemned - since the Apostles wrote 
in Greek — but the doctrines, the religions, the false opinions regarding the 
practice of the virtues through which we rise to heaven. The other sciences 
and arts occupy a middle ground, to be used for good or for evil. Therefore 
let us please try to reach, or at least approach, the place reached by the 
luminaries of our religion [i-e., the Greek and Latin Fathers mentioned 
earlier |.2°8 
It is therefore not the classical and Hellenistic science of language ((ittera- 
tura) nor its related analytical tools that the Christian must reject as non- 
transferable to his own cultural studies and creations. On the contrary, 
since the New Testament and, above all, the letters of Paul occupy an 
important place among writings in Koine Greek, the message of the 
Gospel must be studied and deciphered, and in two ways: on the one hand 
in relation to the contribution it made to the stylistic and semantic devel- 
opment of Koine, and, on the other hand, as a text whose comprehension 
is accessible only along the synchronic and diachronic coordinates of that 
language. These are the two sides, the two points of view, whose conver- 
gence or referential system defines and clarifies the exegetical method put 
into practice by Valla in his Adnotationes. 
Litteratura must therefore not be rejected prejudicially but used freely, 
though mediated and made commensurable with Sacred Scripture. What 
the Christian must reject, however — following in the footsteps of the 
Fathers’ theological and literary practice, and in line with the principles of 
the methodological theory enunciated by Jerome in his letters — are the 
doctrines (dogmata) of the philosophers, the religion (religio) underlying 
the cultural and political praxis of the pagans, and the opinions (opinio- 
nes) of Greek and Hellenistic ethics. This is precisely what Valla had 
attempted to put into practice, in order to find solutions on which to 
base an authentic humanist theology, respectively in the Disputationes 
207 Valla, Elegantiae, book IV, preface (ed. Garin), 620: “gentiles hoc modo locutos esse, 
non decere eodem loqui.” 
208 Ibid., 620-622: “Non lingua gentilium, non grammatica, non rhetorica, non dialec- 
tica, ceteraeque artes damnandae sunt, siquidem Apostoli lingua graeca scripserunt; sed 
dogmata, sed religiones, sed falsae opiniones de actione virtutum per quas in coelum scan- 
dimus. Ceterae autem scientiae atque artes in medio sunt positae, quibus et bene uti possis 
et male. Quapropter conemur obsecro eo pervenire, aut saltem proxime, quo luminaria illa 
nostrae religionis pervenerunt.” 


[PDF page 309]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 289 
and De libero arbitrio (against “philosophical doctrines”), in De falso ... 
Constantini Donatione (with the programmatic call for the pope to be “the 
vicar of Christ alone and not of Caesar as well’), and in De vero falsoque 
bono (with its investigation “of the true virtues that lead us to the true 
good” as compared with Aristotelian, Stoic, and Epicurean ethics).2°9 
In this sense, the Christian must be open to a reappropriation of tradi- 
tional pagan culture. The sciences and the arts, a “human” artifact of the 
pagans, “occupy a middle ground” and thus admit of evangelical deploy- 
ment and transformation. Aquinas would have said that they possess obe- 
diential capacity (capacitas oboedientialis). Here Thomas’s capacitas and, 
even more so, Valla’s concept of a middle ground (medietas), indicate that 
culture, in its many and various historical forms, has an essential and 
qualitative valence with respect to Christian faith and praxis. Indeed, it 
must be noted that this essentially ambivalent character of knowledge 
and, more precisely, the possibility of using literature (humanae litterae) 
for good or evil in theological epistemology, are here affirmed by Valla not 
only explicitly and programmatically, but above all in a way that is unique 
within humanist culture itself. Poggio’s opposition to Valla comes to mind; 
for him, no theological mediation was possible between literature and the 
science of faith. Instead he saw a dichotomy that could in no way be sur- 
mounted or modulated.7!° 
In contrast, Valla’s view of the sciences and the arts as a middle ground 
requires that they converge with Christianity in forming dynamic units 
pregnant and rich with theoretical and practical possibilities. On the one 
hand it affirms the necessity of critical revision each time a particular cul- 
ture is assumed within theological discourse. On the other it emphasizes 
that each piece of human knowledge is uniquely autonomous and thus 
that no one science or art can have a privileged position in relation to 
Christianity — in order that Christianity not be continually redefined by 
the very historicity of culture in general and by the combination of its par- 
ticular forms of expression (even if these are correlated with the temporal 
limits and rhythms of the Gospel). 
The historical rhythm of the forms of cultural expression is incongru- 
ous with the temporo-ecclesiological rhythm of the Gospel. This is what 
209 Valla, De libero arbitrio, 524: “philosophicorum dogmatum’; idem, De falso credita et 
ementita Constantini donatione, ed. Wolfram Setz (Weimar: Bohlau, 1976), 176.8—g9 (97): “ut 
papa tantum vicarius Christi sit et non etiam Caesaris”; idem, De vero falsoque bono, 1.13-14: 
“de veris virtutibus quibus ad verum bonum evadimus.” 
210 [See, e.g., Poggio Bracciolini, Invectiva in L. Vallam I, in idem, Opera omnia, 
1:199—-200. ] 


[PDF page 310]
290 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Valla gives concrete form to when he exalts rhetoric as “queen of the world 
and perfect wisdom” in relation to contemporary theological discourse. 
Hence his identification of patristic theology, which he understands as 
rhetorical theology (theologia rhetorica), as the source of the humanist 
alternative to the contemporary decadence of late scholasticism. 
Valla continues: 
I can’t hold back from saying what I think. Those ancient theologians seem 
to me like certain bees that, flying to far-off pastures, have used their marvel- 
ous art to produce the sweetest honey and wax; modern theologians, how- 
ever, rather resemble ants who steal off into their hiding places with pieces 
of grain swiped from their neighbor.2 
This is Valla’s contrast between the Fathers and the scholastics, between 
the theology of the “ancients,” which is critically rigorous but still open to 
cultural acquisitions and developments, and that of the “moderns,” crawl- 
ing with disputations and dialectical subtleties, by now encased in its own 
inaccessible jargon. He programmatically proclaims his choice between 
the two: 
For my part, I would not only rather be a bee than an ant, but I would also 
rather fight in the service of a king bee than captain an army of ants. We are 
confident that this will be approved by right-minded youths; the old are sim- 
ply hopeless.?!2 
This last statement finds an echo in the break, already in force while Valla 
was writing, between the “Laurentians” (/aurentiani) and the “Poggians’” 
(pogiani), between the followers of Valla and the “old school” (antiqua 
schola), as Bracciolini would himself call it in his Invectivae.? 
In the Elegantiae Valla intends to limit himself to offering a method- 
ological and historical (in Quintilian’s terms) investigation of Latin gram- 
mar to be used by theological discourse in its own argumentative 
procedure and exegetical study of Scripture. That is, he intends to system- 
atically elaborate theology’s morphological and semantic premises, 
21 Valla, Elegantiae, book IV, preface (ed. Garin), 622: “Non possum me continere quo- 
minus quod sentio dicam. Veteres illi theologi videntur mihi velut apes quaedam in longin- 
qua etiam pascua volitantes, dulcissima mella cerasque miro artificio condidisse; recentes 
vero formicis simillimi quae ex proximo sublata furto grana in latibulis suis abscondunt” 
(emphasis added). 
212 Tbid., 622: “At ego, quod ad me attinet, non modo malim apes quam formica esse, sed 
etiam sub rege apium militare quam formicarum exercitum ducere. Quae probatum iri 
bonae mentis iuvenibus, nam senes desperandi sunt, confidimus.” 
713 On the controversy between the “Laurentians” and the “Poggians,” cf. Camporeale, 
Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia, 128-129, n. 13 and 374ff. 


[PDF page 311]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 291 
namely the “rules of grammar” (praecepta grammaticae) that the “science 
of faith,” since it is verbalized in human language, must be made to accept. 
Hence the concluding lines of the preface, the text whose meaning and 
substance we have sought to interpret in relation to the humanist solution 
to the dichotomy between literature and theology: 
Now I return to the work at hand, although what follows differs greatly from 
what came before. For we shall treat [in the fourth book] the meaning of 
words — not all words but rather a sampling, as it were, especially of those 
not treated by others; to treat all words would bea nearly endless endeavor.2!4 
4.7. Erasmus’s Humanism from the Antibarbari to the Life of Jerome: His 
Solution to the Problem of Theology and Literature, and Valla’s Influence 
The role played by the preface to book IV of the Elegantiae in Erasmus’s 
dispute over the relationship between classical literature and theology 
does not seem to have been adequately described. Valla’s text was more 
influential and certainly had a greater impact than can be deduced from 
the mere identification in Erasmus’s corpus of quotations from the vari- 
ous books of the Elegantiae.*> Instead it must be affirmed that Valla’s 
arguments and solutions (as traced in the preface) regarding the antin- 
omy between literature and theology constitute the supporting arch of 
Erasmus’s response to the anti-humanism he faced at the turn of the 
sixteenth century. The editorial evolution of the Antibarbarorum liber 
between 1489 and 1494 — tracked by James Tracy in a 1971 article —- shows 
how Erasmus takes up and reworks Valla’s preface.?!° His reliance on the 
214 Valla, Elegantiae, book IV, preface (ed. Garin), 622: “Nunc ad inceptum redeo, quam- 
quam ea quae sequentur nonnihil a superioribus. Tractabimus enim de verborum significa- 
tione, neque de omnibus vocabulis sed quasi gustum quemdam, et eorum maxime quae ab 
aliis tractata non sunt; nam de omnibus dicere prope infinitum est” (emphasis added). 
215 For what follows, see: Emile V. Telle, Erasme de Rotterdam et le Septiéme Sacrament, 
(Genéve: Droz, 1954), 71-97; Emst Wilhelm Kohls, Die Theologie des Erasmus, 2 vols. (Basel: 
F, Reinhardt, 1966), 1:35-68; Charles Béné, Erasme et saint Augustin, ou Influence de saint 
Augustin sur Vvhumanisme d’Erasme (Genéve: Droz, 1969), 15-95, 281-333; Albert Rabil, 
Erasmus and the New Testament: the Mind of a Christian Humanist (San Antonio: Trinity 
University Press, 1972), 14-26. For the text of the Life of Jerome (Hieronymi stridonensis vita) 
we have followed: Desiderius Erasmus, Opuscula, ed. Wallace K. Ferguson (The Hague: M. 
Nijhoff, 1933), 125-133 (intr.) and 134-190 (text and notes). Too late for consideration, we 
became aware of two essays by Silvano Cavazza: “La cronologia degli Antibarbari e le orig- 
ini del pensiero religioso di Erasmo,” Rinascimento, ser. 2, 15 (1975): 141-179; and “La 
formazione culturale di Erasmo,” La Cultura 13 (1975): 20-40. We thank the author for 
bringing these works to our attention and for providing offprints. 
216 James D. Tracy, “The 1489 and 1494 versions of Erasmus’ Antibarbarorum Liber,” 
Humanistica Lovaniensia 20 (1971): 81-120. 


[PDF page 312]
292 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
preface seems clear in his two thematic foci: first, the formulation of the 
terms of the aporia as it was reproposed by the anti-humanism of the “bar- 
barians”; second, the arguments and solutions put forward regarding the 
supposed dichotomy between theological culture and classical literature. 
Erasmus consciously takes his own “anti-barbarian” counter-response 
directly from Valla, proposing a rhetorical theology in the place of the 
philosophical theology of the contemporary scholastic tradition. It must 
nevertheless be observed that Erasmus’s reiteration, while expanding 
Valla’s proposal for a humanist theology to include multiple levels of cul- 
ture, nevertheless ends up being less convincing, since less radical, than 
Valla’s proposal. 
More precisely, if on the one hand Erasmus repeats arguments that are 
distinctly and originally Valla’s, on the other he revises Valla’s solutions to 
the problem. Alongside the commonplace of Jerome’s Letter to Magnus in 
defense of rhetoric, Erasmus invokes with equal insistence the authority 
of Augustine’s De doctrina christiana, book IV, chapter u1, where the refer- 
ence to classical culture principally concerns philosophy. In his preface, 
however, Valla had deliberately excluded Augustine and instead focused 
on Jerome as the authority for his radically unequivocal stance, namely 
the exclusive exaltation of rhetorical theology in direct opposition to the 
philosophical theology of the scholastic tradition. 
In upholding the humanist principle for a theology founded on the sci- 
ence of rhetoric (along the lines traced in Valla’s preface), Erasmus also 
seems to want to bring De doctrina christiana into the Jerominian sphere 
of a specifically philological and scriptural theology. In so doing he 
attempted to bridge, at least on a theoretical level, the methodological 
and analytical divide underlying the theological work and thought of the 
two greatest Fathers of the Latin Church. Here Erasmus in no way agrees 
with Valla, for whom there subsists an absolute epistemological difference 
between the writings of Augustine and Jerome. And thus Erasmus and his 
works — variously conditioned by controversialist concerns, by his choice 
of literary tools, and by the related periods of his own cultural develop- 
ment — display an attitude and critical stance towards scholasticism that 
are actually less radical than what appears in Valla, especially concerning 
the more important aspect of traditional and contemporary speculative 
theology. All this appears more clearly with regard to their respective 
revivals of patristic theology. Erasmus’s stance is much more complex and 
variegated, developed in different times and in relation to multiple lines of 
theological inquiry. Valla’s is strongly univocal and unilateral, concen- 
trated on Jerome and his works of New Testament exegesis. 


[PDF page 313]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 293 
The preceding observations, which emerge when the Antibarbari is 
read in the light of the preface to the Elegantiae, take on precise contours 
if the same text of Valla is compared to another work of Erasmus, com- 
pleted in 1515/1516 — the same two-year period that witnessed the publica- 
tion of the Novum Instrumentum and Jerome’s Letters. We are referring to 
the Life of Jerome (Hieronymi stridonensis vita), the biography justly con- 
sidered the leading exemplar of humanist hagiography. It served as an 
introduction to the Letters, the first volume of Jerome’s corpus, which 
appeared at the beginning of March, 1516 — at the same time as the Novum 
Instrumentum. 
The Life of Jerome, which also from an editorial point of view is closely 
related to the prefaces to the Novum Instrumentum, provides the best and 
most decisive evidence for the shift that marks the coming of humanist 
theology. The guiding principles for such a theology, which as we have 
seen were outlined completely in the Encomium of St. Thomas of 1457, had 
their epistemological foundation in the preface to book IV of the 
Elegantiae. It is Erasmus himself who, with a reference in an important 
passage of the Life of Jerome (the reference was precisely identified by 
Ferguson in his critical edition), connects his own work directly to Valla’s 
Elegantiae.2” But it must be immediately added that this reference under- 
lies the entire composition of the Life of Jerome. The topos of the caution- 
ary dream and the aporia regarding eloquence and theology, as drawn 
from Jerome’s letters and exegetical work on scripture, constitute the cen- 
tral theme of Erasmus’s biography, just as they did in Valla’s preface. This 
is said expressly in the passage to which we have just made reference and 
whose text we now offer: 
It is painful even to remember the daily growling we hear from some wick- 
edly religious and stupidly learned men who belittle in Jerome what is the 
finest thing about him. I refer of course to his extravagant learning, as they 
term it themselves, and to his eloquence, which to them is somewhat more 
than befits a theologian. They know nothing at all about Jerome except that 
he was pronounced a Ciceronian and scourged. But with regard to this, ... a 
full reply was made by the most learned men Lorenzo Valla and Angelo 
Poliziano, and ... I too once in my youth when less than twenty years of age 
disported myself against the folly of those men in the dialogue entitled 
Antibarbari.2® 
217 (Erasmus, Hieronymi stridonensis vita, |]. 1133 and 1463, with notes. ] 
48 [bid., ll. 126ff.: “Audimus quotidie quosdam impie religiosos et inscite doctos nobis 
ad aurem obgannire, id in Hieronymo calumniantes quod in eo pulcherrimum est, nimi- 
rum doctrinam, ut ipsi vocant, immodicam, et plusculum eloquentiae quam theologum 


[PDF page 314]
294 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
Indeed, as penetratingly traced by Erasmus, the course of Jerome’s biogra- 
phy followed a cultural evolution and a lifelong ideal directed towards 
overcoming the antinomy between Christianity and the pagan world. To 
this end he deployed the theoretical tools of classical literature in his exe- 
getical work on New and Old Testament Scripture. Jerome’s entire life was 
characterized by constant and intense study, whose goal was to formulate 
a rhetorical theology, i.e. a theology that would put the classical science of 
language (litteratura) to critical use for understanding the sources of 
Judeo-Christian revelation. 
Jerome’s “humanistic” education is seen by Erasmus as serving a precise 
theological goal: “he occupied himself with rhetoric more diligently, ... 
hoping that more would take pleasure in sacred literature if theologians 
were to match the majesty of their discipline with dignity of style.”2!9 In 
other words, Erasmus’s own alternative proposition for theology provides 
the perspective for Jerome’s biographical and cultural journey, namely his 
rediscovery, along the arduous and complicated trails of the philological 
criticism of Scripture, of that philosophy of Christ (Christi philosophia) 
that flows from the “purest fonts,” i.e. the literary sources of Judeo- 
Christian revelation.?2° 
It is in this context that Erasmus places the sum of Jerome’s analytical 
inquiry and writing. Jerome’s corpus is as if focused on a convergence of 
profane, secular literature with sacred, divine literature, whose combined 
stream flows towards a theological grammar of the earliest Christian lan- 
guage and writings. Hence Erasmus’s view of the scriptural controversy in 
which Jerome engaged with Rufinus and Augustine. Hence also the way 
Erasmus depicts the peculiar and original theological position that Jerome 
occupied among the Latin Church Fathers. Finally, it is this originality of 
thought in Jerome that Erasmus — along the line that connects him to 
Valla — attempts to demonstrate and somehow to appropriate for himself 
with the publication of a new edition of Jerome’s works. 
deceat. Neque quicquam omnino norunt de Hieronymo, nisi quod Ciceronianus dictus 
vapularit. Verum huius rei, ... ab eruditissimis abunde responsum est, Laurentio Valla et 
Angelo Politiano, et nos olim adulescentuli minores annis viginti lusimus in istorum stulti- 
tiam Dialogis quos Antibarbaros inscripsimus.” Translation by James F. Brady and John C. 
Olin, Collected Works of Erasmus, vol. 61: The Patristic Scholarship, the Edition of Jerome 
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1992), p. 50. 
219 Erasmus, Hieronymi stridonensis vita, ll. 236ff.: “in rhetorica ... sese studiosius exer- 
cuit ... sperans futurum ut plures sacris litteris delectarentur, si quis theologiae maiesta- 
tem dignitate sermonis aequasset” (tr. Brady and Olin, 27, modified). See also Hieronymi 
stridonensis vita, ll. 195-338 and 48off. 
220 Tbid., ll. 48off. and 1213. 


[PDF page 315]
LORENZO VALLA BETWEEN THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE 295 
The special significance, then, of the Life of Jerome, which Erasmus 
intended as a programmatic and normative introduction to Jerome’s 
whole corpus, is as a critique of scholasticism — one no less radical than 
Valla’s — for the proposition of an alternative, humanist theology. Echoing 
Valla, Erasmus starkly contrasts the exemplarity of Jerome and his works 
with scholasticism’s “new breed of theologians.” “Totally ignorant of all 
the arts ... and relying on ... a smattering of Aristotelian philosophy, ... 
they rush into the profession of theology with unwashed feet and hands.” 
And as for the science of the Scriptures, “they turn a sacred discipline into 
something Sophistic or Thomistic or Scotistic or Ockhamistic.”22! Erasmus 
adds that none of Jerome’s contemporaries had treated ecclesiological 
controversies, scriptural inquiries, or dogmatic questions “more theologi- 
cally” than he.?”? Finally, after running through the whole debate over the 
antinomy between literature and theology, from Valla to the literati of his 
own day, Erasmus concludes by encouraging the intelligentsia of Christian 
Europe to take up Jerome’s works and study them in the light of the 
humanist Renaissance and the decadent speculation of scholasticism: 
Till now Jerome has labored under a disadvantage — as he was not read by 
very many, so he was understood by very few .... But henceforth, when 
throughout the entire Christian world the study of classical literature has 
revived and not a few men of talent and of great promise have begun to 
awaken to that old and genuine theology, we all may embrace a Jerome 
reborn, as it were, in our common studies; and each individual may claim 
him as his very own .... Let each sex and each age study him, read him, drink 
him in. There is no kind of teaching which cannot use his support, no way of 
life which may not be formed by his precepts. Let only the heretics abhor 
and hate Jerome. They were the only ones he always considered the bitterest 
of his enemies.?23 
221 Jbid., |. 187: “novum theologorum genus’; ll. 795ff.: “omnium bonarum litterarum 
prorsus rudes ... et mala degustata Aristotelis philosophia freti, pedibus ac manibus illotis 
irruant in theologiae professionem’; ug3ff.: “ex divina faciunt sophisticam, aut thomisti- 
cam, aut scotisticam, aut occamisticam’” (tr. Brady and Olin, 42 and 52). 
222 Tbid., ll. 1226ff.: “magis theologice.” 
223 Tbid., Il. 1534-1565: “Illud hactenus offecit Hieronymo, quod ut a plerisque non legi- 
tur, ita a paucissimis intelligitur .... At posthac quando per universum orbem christianum 
revixerunt bonae litterae et non pauca bonae spei ingenia ad veterem illam ac germanam 
theologiam exergisci coeperunt, Hieronymum veluti renatum communibus studiis 
complectamur omnes: hunc singuli sibi ceu peculiarem vindicent .... Hunc omnis sexus, 
omnis aetas discat, evolvat, imbibat. Nullum doctrinae genus est, quod hinc non queat 
adiuvari; nullum vitae institutum, quod huius praeceptis non formetur. Soli haeretici 
Hieronymum horreant et oderint, quos ille solos semper acerrimos hostes habuit” (tr. 
Brady and Olin, 61-62). 


[PDF page 316]
296 SALVATORE I. CAMPOREALE 
The Life of Jerome and the prefaces to the Novum Instrumentum provide 
Erasmus’s perspective on the new theological question of the early six- 
teenth century, but its center of radiation was fixed in the Encomium of 
St. Thomas of 1457. In this way Valla’s oration acted as an essential break 
between two historical moments of Christian philosophical and theologi- 
cal thought: between medieval scholasticism and the humanist culture of 
the Renaissance, between Thomas Aquinas and Erasmus of Rotterdam, 
the two emblematic poles that encompass the trends and structures of the 
science of faith. 
Lorenzo Valla and his work thus play a founding role for humanist the- 
ology and, at the same time, provide a retrospective view that historicizes 
medieval systematic theology, encasing it within a specific period of 
Christianity’s development. The Encomium of St. Thomas, which synthe- 
sizes Valla’s whole corpus, is perhaps the most conscious portrayal of the 
crisis that came to a head in Christianity between the early fifteenth cen- 
tury and the beginning of the sixteenth. This crisis was organic to the 
political and civic crisis of the same period (acutely identified by the his- 
toriography of civic humanism?2*), but it culminated as a religious and 
theological crisis. That is, it was a crisis of Christian existence and categor- 
ical systematics, of Church (ecclesia) and ecclesiology, of evangelical faith 
and the science of faith. Valla was the first directly to confront, on a theo- 
retical and a practical level, this crisis of fifteenth- and sixteenth-century 
Christianity, and he did so by extending the use of the philological criti- 
cism of humanism into the realm of theological and scriptural study.??5 
224 [For civic humanism, see at least Hans Baron, The Crisis of the Early Italian 
Renaissance: Civic Humanism and Republican Liberty in an Age of Classicism and Tyranny, 
2 vols. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1955); and James Hankins (ed.), Renaissance 
Civic Humanism: Reappraisals and Reflections (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2000). Eds. | 
225 For a full discussion of the “crisis” of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, see 
Salvatore I. Camporeale, “Umanesimo e teologia tra ‘400 e ‘500,” in Problemi di storia della 
Chiesa nei secoli XV-XVII (Napoli: Edizioni Dehoniane, 1979), 137-164. 


[PDF page 317]
LORENZO VALLA 
ENCOMIUM OF ST. THOMAS AQUINAS 
Patrick Baker (ed. and tr.) 
Note on the Text: The Latin text, which is provided here as a supplement to 
the English translation and as a source for the quotations in Camporeale’s 
essay, is substantially that of the critical edition of Stefano Cartei: Lorenzo 
Valla, Encomion sancti Thome Aquinatis, ed. S. Cartei (Firenze: Polistampa, 
2008). Camporeale based his own work on direct consultation of the avail- 
able manuscripts and the earlier edition of Francesco Adorno (Lorenzo 
Valla, Oraciones y Prefacios, ed. F. Adorno [Santiago: Universidad de Chile, 
1955], 290-321), but it has seemed preferable to adopt Cartei’s more cor- 
rect text. A deciding factor was that Cartei follows what he demonstrates 
to be a more reliable manuscript tradition; that is, he argues convincingly 
that ms. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale de France, Lat. 781 A (= P) is more 
trustworthy and closer to the author than both ms. Rome, Biblioteca 
Angelica, 1500 (= R), on which Adomo primarily relied, and ms. Modena, 
Biblioteca Estense Universitaria, Lat. 151 (alpha T.6.15) (= M). While fol- 
lowing Cartei’s readings and emendations (none of which represents a 
significant departure from the version Camporeale used), I have repunc- 
tuated the text, followed my own judgment regarding capitalization, and 
preferred classical orthography in the interests of accessibility to a broader 
audience. I have also reformatted the text in a manner suggested by 
Camporeale’s interpretation, dividing it, moreover, as he does, into the 
five sections exordium, narratio, probatio, refutatio, and peroratio. 
In preparing my own English rendering I have consulted the following 
existing translations: the Italian version of Giorgio Radetti, in Lorenzo 
Valla, Scritti filosofici e religiosi (Firenze: Sansoni, 1953), 455-469 (= In lode 
di S. Tommaso d’Aquino); the Spanish version of Francesco Adorno in Valla, 
Oraciones y Prefacios (= Encomio de Santo Tomds de Aquino); and the 
English version of M. Esther Hanley in Leonard A. Kennedy (ed.), 
Renaissance Philosophy: New Translations (The Hague: Mouton, 1973), 
17-27 (= In Praise of Saint Thomas Aquinas). 


[PDF page 318]
LAURENTII VALLAE 
ENCOMION SANCTI THOMAE AQUINATIS 
[Exordium |] 
10 
15 
20 
25 
[1] Moris fuit vetustissimis temporibus cum apud Graecos tum vero 
apud Latinos ut qui orationem aliqua de re maiore vel ad iudices vel ad 
populum esset habiturus, is fere ab invocatione caelestis numinis exordire- 
tur. Quem ego ritum a veri Dei cultoribus reor introductum, ut sacrificia, ut 
primitias, ut caerimonias, ut ceteros divinos honores, mox ut illa, ita hunc 
quoque a vera religione ad falsas fuisse translatum. Nam id profecto exstitit 
in rebus humanis immanissimum nefas et paene caput malorum omnium, 
cultum religionis immortali Deo et soli creatori debitum tribuere mortali- 
bus ac rebus creatis. Haec consuetudo cum per aliquot saecula in utraque 
natione viguisset, paulatim in desuetudinem versa est, desitumque numina 
invocare non modo ab iis qui malas sed etiam ab iis qui bonas causas age- 
bant: ab iis quidem qui malas quod aut nullos esse deos crederent aut eos 
invocare extimescerent — quisquis enim deos implorat ideo implorat ut 
veritati atque iustitiae assint, quod mali fieri nolunt; ab iis autem qui bonas 
agebant, partim quod iuri suo citra deorum praesidium fidere videri vel- 
lent, partim quod sese praestantiores atque viriliores visum iri putarent, si 
non protinus tamquam feminae ad implorandos deos confugerent — muli- 
ebre namque iam videbatur, non virile, numina implorare, unde apud 
Sallustium Cato inquit: “non votis neque suppliciis muliebribus auxilia 
deorum parantur.’ Verum sicut improbe illi hunc vetustissimum morem 
summoverant et quasi de possessione deiecerant, ita probe fecerunt qui in 
integrum restituerunt in possessionemque reduxerunt, non ut gentiles, 
quod absit, imitarentur, sed ne a gentilibus superari viderentur; nam si illi 
falsis diis tantum honoris tribuebant ut eos in exordiis invocandos putar- 
ent, quanto nos magis hunc honorem Deo vero tribuere debemus? Quare 
istorum ego institutum tam egregium hodie imitari et debeo et volo, laudes 
sancti Thomae Aquinatis relaturus, et, ut consuetum est, sanctissimam Dei 
matrem eamdemque semper virginem invocare, salutans eam angelicis 
verbis: Ave Maria ... 


[PDF page 319]
LORENZO VALLA 
ENCOMIUM OF ST. THOMAS AQUINAS 
[Exordium| 
[1] It was customary in ancient times among the Greeks as well as the 
Latins for whoever was going to give a speech on some important matter, 
either to judges or to the people, in general to begin with a divine invoca- 
tion. I think this rite was introduced by the worshipers of the true God, just 
like sacrifices, the offering of the first-fruits, ceremonies, and the other 
divine honors; and like them, it too soon passed from the true religion to 
false ones. Now, to accord to mortals and created things the religious wor- 
ship due to immortal God, the lone creator, stands out as quite the most 
monstrous of all human transgressions and perhaps the chief of all evils. 
After this custom had reigned among both peoples for several centuries, it 
slowly fell into disuse, and divinities ceased to be invoked not only by those 
pleading bad causes, but also by those pleading good ones. Those pleading 
bad ones either believed that there were no gods or were afraid to invoke 
them — for whoever beseeches the gods beseeches them to attend to truth 
and justice, something the evil do not want to happen. As for those plead- 
ing good causes, in part they wanted to seem to put greater trust in their 
law than in the protection of the gods, in part they thought they would 
seem more distinguished and manlier by not continually taking refuge like 
women in prayers to the gods. For then it seemed effeminate and unmanly 
to invoke deities, wherefore Cato says (in Sallust): “the aid of the gods is not 
procured with vows and womanish prayers.”! But just as those men were 
wrong to cast off this most ancient custom as if banishing it from their pos- 
session, others did well to take it back into their possession and restore it 
intact. This they did not do, as some might think, to imitate the pagans, but 
rather so as not to be seen to be outdone by them. For if the pagans gave 
such great honor to their false gods that they thought they should invoke 
them when beginning their speeches, how much more ought we bestow 
this honor on the true God? Therefore before beginning my praise of 
St. Thomas Aquinas, it is my duty and my pleasure today to imitate that 
outstanding institution of theirs. And so, as is our custom, I invoke the most 
holy mother of God, the eternal virgin, greeting her with the angelic words: 
Ave Maria ...? 
1 Sallust, De coniuratione Catilinae, 52, 29. 
2 The exordium ends with a recitation of the Ave Maria. 


[PDF page 320]
300 ENCOMION S. THOMAE 
[Narratio | 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
[2] Etsi omnes qui in Domino moriuntur beati sunt et sancti, tamen eos 
demum beatos et sanctos promulgat ecclesia quos cognovit vel mortem pro 
religione, pro veritate, pro iustitia oppetisse, vel vita caste integreque tra- 
ducta divinis signis ac miraculis claruisse. Horum priores graeco vocabulo 
martyres, posteriores latino confessores appellat ecclesia, licet utriusque 
nominis vis eodem fere tendat. Quid enim martyres aliud tolerandis tor- 
mentis et obeunda morte fecerunt, nisi Christum nolentes abnegare con- 
fessi sunt? Quorum illa frequentissima in tormentis exstitit vox se non 
negare Christum sed esse Dei filium confiteri. Ergo idem est martyrem esse 
quod confessorem. Rursus quid aliud confessores egerunt quam pie 
vivendo pieque scribendo veritati testimonium perhibuerunt? Siquidem 
Ioannes Baptista, qui ad perhibendum testimonium de lumine — id est de 
veritate — missus erat, non minus illud perhibuit praedicando quam mor- 
tem obeundo. Ergo cum hoc confessores fecerint, nimirum martyres exsti- 
terunt: martyr enim transfertur latine ‘testis’ et martyrion ‘testimonium. 
[3] Hoc quamquam ita sit, tamen Ecclesia, ut dixi — latina dumtaxat — 
superiores tantum martyres appellandos censuit et praerogativa ordinis 
honorandos, quod videlicet milites strenui et fortes cum in ceteris militiae 
operibus tum praecipue in proeliis imperatori suo probantur. Martyres 
autem, qui fuere Christi milites, pro imperatore suo in acie steterunt san- 
guinemque ac vitam profuderunt. Confessores vero, et ipsi milites Christi, 
solum labores militares, magnos illos quidem atque diutinos, pertulerunt, 
parati et mortem pro imperatore Deo subire, verum ipsis ut eam subirent 
aut in acie starent non contigit. Idcirco martyres ampliore honore fuisse 
afficiendi videntur. Quod etsi iure ac merito factum est, quis tamen 
negaverit esse quosdam e numero confessorum qui nonnullis martyribus 
non modo aequari possint verum etiam anteferri? Quod divino quoque tes- 
timonio declaratur, cum videamus multos confessores fuisse quam quos- 
dam martyres longe miraculis illustriores. 
[4] Quorsum autem haec? Ut appareat Thomam nostrum Aquinatem, 
etsi confessorem, non tamen esse continuo post martyres reponendum, ut 
mea fert opinio, nihilo inferiorem, ne longius exempla repetam, aut Petro 
eiusdem ordinis, qui ob tutandam veritatem 


[PDF page 321]
ENCOMIUM OF ST. THOMAS 301 
[2] Although all who die in the Lord are blessed and saints, nevertheless 
the Church expressly designates as blessed and saints those whom it recog- 
nizes either as having met death for religion, for truth, for justice, or as hav- 
ing achieved fame for leading a chaste and spotless life accompanied by 
divine signs and miracles. It uses the Greek word ‘martyrs’ (martyres) for the 
former and the Latin one ‘confessors’ (confessores) for the latter, although 
both terms have approximately the same meaning. For what else have mar- 
tyrs done in enduring torture and meeting death than confess themselves 
unwilling to deny Christ? Under torture they repeatedly refused to deny 
Christ but rather confessed that he was the son of God. Therefore a martyr is 
the same as a confessor. On the other hand, what else have confessors done 
in living piously and writing piously than bear witness to the truth? John the 
Baptist was sent to bear witness to the light — that is, to the truth — and he did 
so no less by preaching than by meeting death.? Thus by acting in this way, 
surely confessors have shown themselves to be martyrs. For martyr is trans- 
lated in Latin as witness (testis), and martyrion testimony (testimonium). 
[3] Although this is the case, the Church, as I have said — at least the 
Latin one — has decided that only the former are to be called martyrs and 
honored with the privilege of that rank, because, as vigorous and brave sol- 
diers, they are recognized by their commander for their military service 
and especially for their deeds in battle. The martyrs, then, who were sol- 
diers of Christ, stood in the battle line for their commander and poured out 
their blood and life. The confessors were themselves also soldiers of Christ, 
but they merely performed military labors (albeit great and lasting ones); 
and although they were prepared to undergo death for their commander, 
God, they did not actually undergo it or stand in the battle line. For that 
reason it seems that martyrs ought to have been accorded greater honor. 
The justice of this view notwithstanding, who could deny that there are 
certain confessors who not only equal but even surpass some martyrs? 
Divine testimony makes this clear, as we see that many confessors were 
much more renowned for miracles than certain martyrs. 
[4] What is the point of these considerations? To show that our Thomas 
Aquinas, although a confessor, should not necessarily be placed below the 
martyrs. In my opinion he is in no way inferior — not to look too far afield 
for examples — either to Peter the Dominican,* whose defense of the truth 
3 John 1:6-8. 
4 St. Peter of Verona (St. Peter Martyr). 
[Narratio | 


[PDF page 322]
65 
70 
a9 
80 
85 
90 
302 ENCOMION S. THOMAE 
a rustico quodam furioso falce interfectus est, aut Thoma episcopo 
Cantuariensi, qui tamquam pastor bonus pro grege suo, ne clerus bonis 
spoliaretur, occubuit. Quod eo quoque probatur argumento quod, cum 
utrique horum Thomae nomen fuerit, tamen huic nostro non ab homine, 
sed divinitus illud impositum, cum sua interpretatione Thomas hebraice 
tum abyssus tum geminus transfertur, qualis vere Thomas Aquinas fuit, vel 
abyssus quaedam scientiae vel geminus ob scientiam et virtutem, utramque 
singularem atque incredibilem, veluti quidam sol fulgore doctrinarum 
lucidissimus et fervore virtutum ardentissimus. Propter fulgorem quidem 
doctrinarum inter Cherubim, propter fervorem autem virtutum inter 
Seraphim collocandus, quas nunc referam. 
[5] Verum enimvero eas referre conanti mihi videntur quidam occurrere 
et quasi manus obiicere reclamantes: “quid ais? quid tibi cum ista hyper- 
bole vis, amica stultis, inimica prudentibus? Nullamne tu veritatis, nullam 
conscientiae tuae, nullam horum tot gravissimorum sapientissimorumque 
hominum, qui te audiunt, rationem habebis? Non es contentus Thomam 
Aquinatem aequasse martyribus et permultis eorum praetulisse, nisi eum 
efferas usque ad Cherubim, super quos Deus sedet, nisi etiam, quo nullus 
est ordo angelorum altior, ipsis Seraphim aequiperes? Quid plus Thomae 
apostolo tributurus? Quid plus doctori gentium Paulo, tamquam uni ex 
Cherubim? Quid plus Ioanni Evangelistae, tamquam uni ex Seraphim?” 
[6] Huic ego respondeam me quidem sentire omnes qui scientia rerum 
divinarum imbuti sunt aliquid habere commune cum Cherubim, omnes 
item qui sunt Dei caritate perfusi socios esse Seraphim, nedum Thomam 
scientia et caritate plenissimum, tamen me iuste ab eo vel reprehendi 
vel admoneri. Quapropter huius ordinis fratres exoratos velim ut mihi 
dent veniam in referendis istius sancti laudibus temperamento potius 
quam licentia utenti, nec eas omnes sed maximas quasque referenti. 
Perstringendae enim sunt illae apud hos patres conscriptos, non explican- 
dae, ne taedium afferant, utique tantae et tam magnae ut si verbis eas coner 
extollere “ante diem clauso componat Vesper Olympo,’ ut poeta inquit. 


[PDF page 323]
ENCOMIUM OF ST. THOMAS 303 
roused some mad peasant to kill him with a sickle, or to Thomas, bishop of 
Canterbury,° who, like the good shepherd protecting his flock, died to keep 
the clergy from being despoiled of its goods. That he is not inferior is fur- 
ther demonstrated by the following argument: although both men had the 
name of Thomas, our Thomas received it not by human but by divine will, 
since the meaning of Thomas in Hebrew is both ‘bottomless pit’ (abyssus) 
and ‘twin’ (geminus). And Thomas Aquinas truly was such a one: a kind of 
bottomless pit of knowledge, and a twin due to the pairing of knowledge 
and virtue in him, both of which were without parallel and beyond belief. 
He was like a kind of sun, shining forth in the dazzling splendor of his 
learning and burning bright with the ardor of his virtues. He is to be placed 
among the Cherubim for the splendor of his learning, among the Seraphim 
for the ardor of his virtues. Of these qualities I shall now speak. 
[5] But in my attempt to do so, some people seem to me to be objecting 
and just about throwing up their hands, crying, “What are you saying? What 
are you aiming at with this hyperbole of yours, which is the friend of the 
foolish, enemy of the prudent? Will you have no regard for the truth, for 
your own conscience, or for your audience, which is composed of numer- 
ous men of the greatest importance and wisdom? Are you not content to 
make Thomas Aquinas the equal of the martyrs and to prefer him to many 
of them? Must you raise him up to the level of the Cherubim, above whom 
God sits? Must you also compare him to the very Seraphim, the highest 
order of angels? What more will you accord to the apostle Thomas? What 
more to Paul the teacher of the Gentiles — that he is one of the Cherubim? 
What more to John the Baptist — that he is one of the Seraphim?” 
[6] Let me respond that I do indeed think that all who are imbued with 
the knowledge of divine truths have something in common with the 
Cherubim, just as all who are infused with the love of God are the fellows of 
the Seraphim — to say nothing of Thomas, so incredibly full of knowledge 
and love. Still, | have been justly reproached and warned. Therefore I entreat 
the brothers of this order to pardon me if I relate the praises of its saint with 
greater temperance than I otherwise might have done, and if I do not men- 
tion all of them but focus only on those of the greatest importance. For to 
this august body they ought to be narrated briefly, not treated at length, lest 
they grow tiresome. And if I tried to praise such great and powerful virtues 
with words, “the day would sooner than the tale be done,”¢ as the poet says. 
5 St. Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury. 
6 Virgil, Aeneid, 1.374, tr. Dryden. 


[PDF page 324]
304 ENCOMION S. THOMAE 
[Probatio | 
95 
100 
105 
110 
115 
125 
[7] Merito igitur talis vir — ut de virtutibus eius prius dicam, dicturus 
postea de scientiis — merito debuit antequam nasceretur mundo praedici, 
eius ortus prophetari, vita promitti, mors etiam nuntiari. Etenim matri eius 
ventrem ferenti anachoreta quidam, vir Dei qui ad hoc ipsum denuntian- 
dum venerat, gratulabundus dixit genituram esse filium quem Thomam 
appellaret, in quo excellentia huius nominis impleretur. Solet Deus, quo- 
tiens aliquid eximium ac novum terris dare destinavit, id signis aut vatici- 
niis enuntiare. Cuius rei sunt non parum multa exempla, sed brevitatis 
gratia uno et domestico ero contentus. 
[8] Sic beati Dominici, huius familiae progenitoris, magnitudo matri 
suae, cum gravida esset, praedicta est. Non dicam utrum praestantius fuerit 
vaticinium, ne inter patrem et filium videatur, quantum in nobis est, esse 
certatio. Sint paria de utroque vaticinia, paria amborum vitae merita. 
Neuter alteri praeponatur: sint tamquam duo consules, quo nullus erat 
maior magistratus, pari veneratione nobis honorandi, omnibus uterque vir- 
tutibus, infinitis uterque miraculis clari. Quorum etsi alterum modo lau- 
dandum habeo, tamen utrumque coniungam, primum quia, cum pares 
ambos faciam, sic magis liquebit quousque dignitatis et celsitudinis putem 
Thomam esse provehendum, deinde quia institutum Praedicatorum est 
fratres binos ire, non singulos. 
[9] Dominicus igitur domum Praedicatorum condidit, Thomas eius pavi- 
menta marmore vestivit. Dominicus parietes struxit, Thomas picturis eos 
egregiis adornavit. Dominicus fratrum columen exstitit, Thomas specimen. 
Dominicus plantavit, Thomas irrigavit. Ille dignationes atque episcopatus 
ultro oblatos refugit atque adversatus est, hic nobilitatem, opes, propin- 
quos, parentes tamquam sirenes effugit. Ille castitatem et continentiam 
Pauli, hic virginitatem Ioannis Evangelistae reddidit. Illius humilitate — 
quam significantius graeci tapeinophrosynen vocant — nihil admirabilius, 
huius tanta humilitas fuit ut etiam de aliorum tumore atque iactantia 
miraretur, in se numquam id vitium expertus, ut apud quosdam fratres sim- 
pliciter confessus est, cum tamen tot et tanta in se agnosceret ornamenta. 
[10] Hae sunt propriae virtutum laudes. Illa vero testimonia virtutum et 
praemia et quasi in hac vita paradisus — revelationes, visiones, miracula — 
quae tanta in his fuerunt, ut cetera taceam, 


[PDF page 325]
ENCOMIUM OF ST. THOMAS 305 
[Probatio | 
[7] Justly, therefore, such a man — let me speak first about his virtues and 
later about his knowledge — justly was he destined to be foretold to the world 
before he was bom, his birth prophesied, his life predicted, even his death 
announced. For when his mother was with child, a certain hermit, a man of 
God who had come precisely to bring her this news, congratulated her and 
told her that she would bear a son whom she would call Thomas and who 
would be filled with the excellence of this name. God, whenever he has 
resolved to give something extraordinary and new to the world, is wont to 
announce it with signs or prophecies. There are very many examples of this, 
but, for the sake of brevity, I shall be content with one from the family. 
[8] In the same way the greatness of the blessed Dominic, the founder of 
this family, was foretold to his mother when she was pregnant. I will not say 
which prophecy was more extraordinary, in order to avoid (to the extent 
possible) the appearance of a contest between father and son. Let the 
prophecies about each man be equal, equal the merits of both their lives. 
Let neither be placed before the other. Let them be like two consuls, the 
highest of magistracies. We must honor them with equal veneration, both 
of them renowned for all the virtues, both for miracles without number. 
Although I am only here to praise one of the two, nevertheless I will join 
them together. First, because by setting them equal it will become all the 
clearer to what heights of lofty dignity I think Thomas should be raised. 
Second, because the rule of the Preachers is that the brothers go in twos, 
not singly. 
[9] So then, Dominic founded the house of the Preachers; Thomas 
covered its floors with marble. Dominic built its walls; Thomas decorated 
them with the finest paintings. Dominic was the pillar of the brothers, 
Thomas their shining example. Dominic planted; Thomas gave water. The 
one shunned and resisted the honors and episcopacies bestowed upon 
him; the other fled nobility, wealth, kinsmen, and parents as if they 
were sirens. The one imitated the chastity and continence of Paul, the 
other the virginity of John the Evangelist. Of the one nothing was more 
admirable than his humility (which the Greeks more meaningfully call 
tapeinophrosyneé). The other had so much humility that he was even aston- 
ished at the boasting and bragging of others; he never felt this vice in him- 
self, as he frankly confessed to some brothers, although he still recognized 
his own great and numerous talents. 
[10] These are the praises of their virtues. Now for the testimonies of their 
virtues and their rewards, the revelations, visions, and miracles which are like 
paradise on earth. They were so great in them that, to speak of nothing else, 


[PDF page 326]
130 
135 
140 
306 ENCOMION S. THOMAE 
ut uterque sanctos Apostolos Petrum et Paulum sive re vera sive per speciem, 
uterque sanctissimam Dei matrem, uterque Dominum Salvatorem sive in 
corpore sive extra corpus et viderit et audierit, deque obitu suo imminenti 
certior factus sit. Nam adeo ferventes in orationibus erant ut interdum sub- 
limes a terra, Deo miraculum quibusdam fratribus indicante, cernerentur. 
[11] Denique, ut finem comparationis faciam, ille optimam fratrum 
regulam scripsit, hic plurimos ac praestantissimos libros. At plus est, dicas, 
libros composuisse quam regulam. Cur ita plus esse ais? Dum hic scribun- 
dis «libris» operam dat, ille regundis provinciis incumbit et, ut optimus rec- 
tor, suis populis bene vivendi regulam ac legem tradit, et certe non plures 
transmittit in caelum scriptis suis Thomas quam Dominicus sua regula. 
Concedatur ergo in virtutibus, in miraculis, in gloria pares esse Dominicum 
et Thomam, non magis inter se differentes atque discretos quam Lucifer est 
et Hesperus. 
[Refutatio] 
145 
150 
155 
160 
[12] Dixi de virtutibus ac miraculis Thomae breviter et nude, nulla usus 
amplificatione atque exornatione, ne minus quam pro rei dignitate, ut in 
hac temporis angustia, dicerem. Credo iam a me expectari ut quid de huius 
sancti scientia, quod secundo loco proposui, dicam, quibus eum praepo- 
nam, quibus aequiperem. 
[13] Non me fugit quosdam, qui de hac re hoc die ex hoc loco orationem 
habuerunt, non modo nulli doctorum ecclesiae secundum Thomam fecisse 
sed etiam omnibus anteposuisse. Qui, cur nulli secundum facere debeant, 
ex eo probabant quod quidam integerrimae vitae frater inter orandum 
viderit Augustinum, quem summum theologorum statuunt, et una 
Thomam, mirabili utrumque praeditum maiestate, Augustinumque dicen- 
tem audierit Thomam esse sibi in gloria parem. Cur autem eumdem pos- 
sint omnibus praeponere, hinc demonstrabant quod dicerent eum ad 
probationem theologiae adhibere logicam, metaphysicam atque omnem 
philosophiam, quam superiores doctores vix primis labiis degustassent. 
[14] Lubricus hic mihi et anceps locus, non modo propter sancti cuius de 
laudibus loquimur dignitatem, sed etiam propter inolitam apud plerosque 
opinionem neminem posse sine dialecticorum, metaphysicorum, cetero- 
rum philosophorum praeceptis evadere theologum. 


[PDF page 327]
ENCOMIUM OF ST. THOMAS 307 
they saw and heard the holy Apostles Peter and Paul (either truly or ina 
vision), the most holy mother of God, and the Lord our Savior (either in the 
body or out of the body’). Both men were told about their imminent deaths. 
What is more, they prayed so heatedly that now and then they were seen 
levitating, God revealing the miracle to certain brothers. 
[11] Finally, to complete the comparison: the one wrote the brothers’ 
most excellent rule, the other the most outstanding and the greatest num- 
ber of books. But, you might say, it is a greater thing to have written books 
than a rule. Why do you say this? While Thomas devotes himself to writ- 
ings, Dominic rules the provinces and, as an excellent leader, gives his peo- 
ples a Rule and law for living well. Certainly Thomas sends no more men to 
heaven with his writings than Dominic does with his Rule. Therefore let it 
be granted that virtue, glory, and miracles are equal in Dominic and 
Thomas, who are no more different and distinct from one another than the 
morning from the evening star. 
[Refutatio] 
[12] I have spoken of Thomas’s virtues and miracles briefly and simply, 
having made no use of exaggeration and embellishment, lest, in the short 
time available, I say less than the dignity of the subject requires. I believe 
you would now like me to say something about this saint’s knowledge, 
which I proposed to treat second, saying whom I would set him above and 
whom I would call his equal. 
[13] It has not escaped me that certain people who held an oration here 
today on the same subject not only made Thomas second to none of the 
doctors of the Church but also placed him above them all. They claim that 
they ought to consider him second to none because a certain friar of the 
utmost purity supposedly saw Augustine, whom they count as the greatest 
theologian, together with Thomas. Both were endowed with wonderful 
majesty, and he heard Augustine say that Thomas was his equal in glory. The 
reason they gave for being able to put him above everyone is that for proof 
in theology he used logic, metaphysics, and all philosophy, which the earlier 
doctors are supposed to have barely tasted with the tips of their tongues. 
[14] This is a slippery and perilous place for me, not only on account of 
the dignity of the saint we are praising, but also because of the deep-set 
opinion, held by so many, that no one can become a theologian without the 
precepts of the dialecticians, metaphysicians, and the other philosophers. 
Mo GOW 122. 


[PDF page 328]
165 
170 
175 
180 
185 
190 
308 ENCOMION S. THOMAE 
Quid igitur agam? Reformidabone, tergiversabor, dissimulabo quid sen- 
tiam dicere, et lingua a corde dissentiet? Quoniam huc ascendi non mea 
sponte sed exoratus a fratribus nec tacere mihi integrum est, non commit- 
tam ut quisquam putet me scientem esse mentitum. 
[15] Ego in sancto Thoma eximiam quidem scribendi subtilitatem etiam 
atque etiam laudo, diligentiam admiror, copiam, varietatem, absolutionem 
doctrinarum stupeo. Addo — quod plerique tribuere nolint — id quod ab 
ipso dictum esse memorant, eum omnino nullum legisse librum quem non 
plane intellexerit, quod haud scio an ulli nostri temporis contigerit, vel 
iurisperito in iure civili, vel medico in medicina, vel philosopho in philoso- 
phia, vel oratori in antiquarum rerum lectione, et item in ceteris artibus 
atque scientiis, nedum uni in omnibus. 
[16] Ista autem quae vocant metaphysica et modos significandi et alia id 
genus, quae recentes theologi tamquam novam sphaeram nuper inventam 
aut planetarum epicyclos admirantur, nequaquam ego tantopere admiror, 
nec ita multum interesse arbitror an scias an nescias, et quae forte sit satius 
nescire tamquam meliorum impedimenta. Neque id meis argumentis pla- 
num faciam, etsi possem facere, sed veterum theologorum auctoritate, qui 
tantum abest ut haec in libris suis tractaverint ut ne nomina quidem ipsa 
scripta reliquerint: Cyprianus, Lactantius, Hilarius, Ambrosius, Hieronymus, 
Augustinus. 
[17] An scilicet ob ignorationem? Qui fieri potest? Nam sive in nostra 
lingua fundamentum haec habent, illi latinissimi fuerunt, recentes autem 
omnes paene barbari; sive in graeca, illi graeca noverunt, isti ignorant. Cur 
igitur non tractaverint? Quia tractanda non fuerunt, et forte etiam igno- 
randa. Idque duabus de causis, una rerum, altera verborum. 
[18] Rerum quidem, quod ista nihil ad scientiam rerum divinarum con- 
ducere videbantur. Id quod etiam visum est theologis graecis, Basilio, 
Gregorio, loanni Chrysostomo ac ceteris eius aetatis, qui neque dialectico- 
rum captiunculas neque metaphysicas ambages neque modorum signifi- 
candi nugas in quaestionibus sacris admiscendas putaverunt, ac ne in 
philosophia quidem suarum disputationum fundamenta iecerunt, cum 
Paulum clamantem legerent: 


[PDF page 329]
ENCOMIUM OF ST. THOMAS 309 
What am I to do then? Shrink in fear, make an about-face, disguise what 
I think, and have my tongue contradict my heart? Since it was not of my 
own accord but at the entreaty of the brothers that I rose to speak, and 
since it is not my way to remain silent, I shall not give anyone cause to think 
that I have not spoken my mind. 
[15] I highly praise the exceptional simplicity of St. Thomas’s writing; 
I admire his carefulness; I am amazed at the fullness, the variety, the com- 
pleteness of his teachings. I add another thing, with which many people 
would not credit him but which he himself is supposed to have said: that he 
never read any book that he did not fully understand. This is something 
that I doubt has happened to anyone of our time: no jurist in civil law, no 
doctor in medicine, no philosopher in philosophy, no humanist in the read- 
ing of ancient texts, nor anyone else in the remaining arts and sciences, 
much less one man in all fields. 
[16] But those things which they call metaphysics and modes of signify- 
ing and the like, which modern theologians regard with wonder like a 
newly discovered sphere or like the epicycles of the planets, I regard with 
no great wonder at all. Nor do I think, therefore, that it matters much 
whether one knows them or not. And perhaps it would be preferable not to 
know them, as they are like impediments to better things. This I will make 
clear not with my own arguments (although I could) but by citing the 
authority of the ancient theologians — Cyprian, Lactantius, Hilary, Ambrose, 
Jerome, Augustine — who were so far from treating such matters in their 
works that they did not even mention them. 
[17] Was it because they were ignorant? How could that be possible? For 
if these things have a basis in our own language, those men were as Latin as 
can be, whereas modern theologians are nearly all barbarians. And if in 
Greek, the ancient theologians knew it, but these moderns of yours do not. 
Why, then, should they not have treated these subjects? Because they were 
not supposed to be treated, and perhaps they were not even supposed to be 
known — and this for two reasons: one having to do with their contents, the 
other with their words. 
[18] Regarding their contents: because these subjects did not seem to 
lead to the knowledge of divine truths. Such also seemed to be the case to 
the Greek theologians Basil, Gregory, John Chrysostom, and the others of 
that age. They did not think that the sophisms of dialectics, the obscuri- 
ties of metaphysics, or the trifles of the modes of signifying should be 
mixed in with sacred questions. Nor did they even lay the foundations 
of their disputations in philosophy, for they heeded Paul’s exclamation: 


[PDF page 330]
195 
200 
205 
210 
215 
220 
310 ENCOMION S. THOMAE 
“non per philosophiam et inanem fallaciam.’ Quod etiam usu ipsi intelligi- 
mus. Quid enim in philosophia non dico in rationali, quae tota in verbis est, 
de qua et dixi et dicam, sed morali et naturali quod sit indubitatum 
ratumque, nisi quod in naturali aut medicorum aut aliorum experimenta 
deprehenderunt? 
[19] Verborum autem, quod alia est condicio linguae graecae alia latinae, 
quae longior foret ad disputandum materia et quaestio ab hoc tempore ali- 
ena. Hoc dixisse sit satis, hos doctores ecclesiae latinos reformidasse vocab- 
ula quae auctores latinos, id est suos in loquendo magistros, graecarum 
litterarum eruditissimos nunquam viderant usurpasse, quae novi theologi 
semper inculcant: ens, entitas, quidditas, identitas, reale, essentiale, suum 
esse, et verba illa quae dicuntur ampliari, dividi, componi, et alia huiusmodi. 
Ergo haec non minima ex parte nugatoria aut non tractanda fuerunt illis 
aut ignoranda, ne magis ignorarent. 
[20] Neque vero hoc dico ut recentibus theologis derogem — cur enim 
derogare velim praesertim saeculo meo? — sed ut veteres iniuste reprehen- 
sos sugillatosque defendam, qui non sunt hunc in modum theologati sed se 
totos ad imitandum Paulum apostolum contulerunt, omnium theologorum 
longe principem ac theologandi magistrum. Cuius is est dicendi modus, ea 
vis, ea maiestas ut quae sententiae apud alios etiam apostolos iacent eae 
sint apud hunc erectae, quae apud alios stant apud hunc proelientur, quae 
apud alios vix fulgent apud hunc fulgurare et ardere videantur, ut non ab re 
gladium, quod est verbum Dei, manu tenens figuretur. Hic est verus et, ut 
dicitur, germanus theologandi modus, haec vera dicendi et scribendi lex, 
quam qui sectantur ii profecto optimum dicendi genus theologandique 
sectantur. Quare non est ut illis veteribus, vere Pauli discipulis, hoc nomine, 
quod ab his philosophia theologiae non admisceatur, aut detrahant novi 
theologi aut noster Thomas sit praeponendus. 


[PDF page 331]
ENCOMIUM OF ST. THOMAS 301 
“not through philosophy and vain deceit.’® This we know from experience 
as well. For what is there in philosophy? I do not mean dialectics, the whole 
of which lies in words; I have already spoken about it and will do so again. 
No, I mean moral and natural philosophy. What is there in them that is 
indubitable and settled except the things discovered in natural philosophy 
through the observations of doctors and others? 
[19] Regarding their words: because the nature of Greek is different from 
that of Latin. This would be a rather tedious subject to discuss, and it is a 
question for another time. Let it suffice to have said that the Latin doctors 
of the Church dreaded words which the great Latin authors (who were 
their teachers in the language), although experts in Greek, never used, 
words that are continually pressed into service by modern theologians: ens, 
entitas, quidditas, identitas, reale, essentiale, suum esse, as well as those 
terms which are given names like ampliari, dividi, componi, and other such 
things. Thus these largely worthless trifles were either not to be treated, or 
else they were to be disregarded, lest they lead to greater ignorance. 
[20] I am not saying this to detract from modern theologians — why 
would I want to detract from my very own age? — but to defend the ancients, 
who are unjustly blamed and abused for not having theologized according 
to this method. Instead they devoted themselves wholly to imitating the 
apostle Paul, by far the prince of all theologians and the master of theolo- 
gizing. His manner of speaking, his power, his majesty were such that what 
fell flat when spoken by others, even the apostles, he uttered loftily; what in 
the mouths of others stood its ground, rushed from his into battle; and 
what from others shone dimly, from him seemed to flash and burn, so that 
it is not off the mark for him to be represented holding in his hand a sword, 
i.e. the word of God.!° This is the true and, so to speak, the genuine mode of 
theologizing. This is the true law of speaking and writing, and those who 
pursue it doubtless pursue the very best manner of speaking and theologiz- 
ing. Therefore the ancients, the true disciples of Paul, should not be criti- 
cized by modern theologians or placed second to our Thomas on account 
of not having mixed theology with philosophy. 
SE Cole2:8: 
9 The first set of words (‘being, ‘entity, ‘quiddity, ‘identity, ‘real being, ‘essential being, 
‘its own being’) are terms of scholastic philosophy that in Valla’s view represent incompre- 
hensible jargon. Ampliari (‘to be ampliated’ or ‘ampliation’) is a term proper to supposition 
theory, a part of scholastic philosophy that deals with the proper referents and significations 
of names. Componi (‘to be composed’ or ‘composition’) and dividi (‘to be divided’ or ‘divi- 
sion’) refer to types of logical fallacies treated by scholastic philosophers. 
10° Eph: 627. 


[PDF page 332]
312 ENCOMION S. THOMAE 
[Peroratio | 
225 
230 
235 
240 
245 
[21] Quid autem? Aequandus? Omnibus eum aequare non ausim, pleris- 
que tamen etiam facile praetulerim, quos, ne parum id esse videatur, nomi- 
natim recensebo. Praepono Thomam loanni Cassiano, quem tamquam 
optimum doctorem sanctus Dominicus fertur lectitare solitus. Praepono 
Anselmo, in primis acuto atque exculto. Praepono Bernardo, doctori eru- 
dito, suavi, copioso, sublimi. Praepono Remigio, omnium suae aetatis viro 
doctissimo. Praepono Bedae, his omnibus doctiori. Praepono Isidoro, quem 
sui amatores negant esse ulli secundum. Quid dicam <de> Magistro 
Sententiarum atque Gratiano, qui magis seduli collectores quam veri auc- 
tores dici merentur? Praepono item, etsi de numero recentium theologo- 
rum sunt, fratribus omnibus tam huius ordinis quam ceterorum, Alberto 
Magno, Aegidio, Alexandro Alensi, Bonaventurae, Ioanni Scoto reliquisque 
suo ipsorum iudicio tam magnis ut sese antiquis aequare fastidiant. 
Praepono praeterea Lactantio atque Boethio, dumtaxat in theologia, nam 
in ceteris nulla est comparatio. Idem dico de Cypriano. Addo etiam, 
licet invitus, Hilarium; cuius scriptis quid tandem sanctius, doctius, 
eloquentius? 
[22] An ne hoc quidem Thomae satis est? O quanti et quanta laude digni 
sunt hi quibus Thomam anteposui! An etiam illos quattuor omnium sum- 
mos, paene alteros Evangelistas, in dubium certamenque vocabimus et 
aliquem de illa quadriga detrahemus ut in eius loco Thomam reponamus? 
Quorum vix scio quem cui praeferam in sua quemque dote mirabilem. Nam 
etsi Augustinus omnibus vulgo praefertur, quia plures tractavit in theologia 
quaestiones et est in multis haud dubie omnibus praeferendus, tamen, si 
scripta Ambrosii cum altero tanto scriptorum Augustini comparentur, meo 
iudicio non sint posthabenda. Nec Hieronymus ulla in parte cedit ingenio 
Augustini, in omni autem doctrinarum genere adeo maior ut mihi Augusti- 
nus tamquam mediterraneum mare, Hieronymus tamquam oceanus, quem 


[PDF page 333]
ENCOMIUM OF ST. THOMAS 313 
[Peroratio | 
[21] What then? Should he be their equal? I would not dare to call him 
the equal of them all. Yet I would prefer him, and willingly, to many whom, 
lest it seem of little account, I shall list by name. I set Thomas above John 
Cassian, whom St. Dominic is said to have been in the habit of reading as 
if the best doctor. I set him above Anselm," the sharpest and most refined. 
I set him above Bernard,!” a learned, sweet, eloquent, and sublime doctor. 
I set him above Remigius,* the most learned man of his age. I set him above 
Bede, more learned than all of them. I set him above Isidore, whom his 
admirers deny is second to anyone. What should I say about the Master of 
the Sentences!4 and Gratian, who deserve more to be called assiduous com- 
pilers than true authors? Likewise, I set him above all the brothers of both 
his order and the others (although here we are talking about modern theo- 
logians): Albert the Great, Giles,!© Alexander of Hales, Bonaventure, John 
the Scot,!® and the rest, who are so convinced of their own greatness that 
they are loath to compare themselves to the ancients. Moreover I set him 
above Lactantius and Boethius, although only in theology, for in other areas 
there is no comparison. I say the same about Cyprian, and I add, albeit 
unwillingly, Hilary as well; for what, finally, is holier, more learned, more 
eloquent than his writings? 
[22] Or is not even this enough for Thomas? How great and how praise- 
worthy are these men above whom I have set Thomas! Or shall we also call 
into question and dispute the four greatest of all, who were like a second 
team of evangelists? Shall we pull one of them out of that team so as to 
replace him with Thomas? I barely know which of them to prefer to whom, 
as each one had his own extraordinary gift. For although Augustine is com- 
monly preferred to all, because he treated more theological questions and 
is in many respects indubitably to be preferred, nevertheless, if Ambrose’s 
writings were compared with an equal number of Augustine's, I do not 
think they would be ranked second. Nor does Jerome yield in any way to 
Augustine’s intellect; he is so much the greater in all areas of learning that 
Augustine seems to me like the Mediterranean, Jerome the ocean, upon 
1 Anselm of Canterbury. 
12 Bernard of Clairvaux. 
13 Remigius of Auxerre. 
14 Peter Lombard. 
15 Giles of Rome. 
16 John Duns Scotus. 


[PDF page 334]
250 
255 
260 
265 
270 
275 
280 
314 ENCOMION S. THOMAE 
pauci nostrorum navigant, esse videatur. Gregorius his longe impar erudi- 
tione, sed cura et diligentia par, suavitate autem tanta atque sanctitate ut 
angelicum paene sermonem repraesentet. 
[23] Horum alicui parem facere Thomam vereor aut aliquem Latinorum. 
Potius eos cum totidem Graecis comparaverim: Ambrosium cum Basilio, 
cuius, ut video, exstitit aemulus; Hieronymum cum Gregorio Nazianzeno, 
cuius auditorem et discipulum se fuisse profitetur; Augustinum cum Joanne 
Chrysostomo, quem multis in locis secutus est et in librorum copia aemula- 
tus; Gregorium cum Dionysio, quem Areopagitam vocant, quod eius ipse 
primus Latinorum, quantum invenio, facit mentionem (nam superioribus 
quos nominavi, non modo Latinis verum etiam Graecis, opera Dionysii 
fuere ignota). Ad hos proxime accedit loannes Damascenus, apud Graecos 
auctor celeberrimus, ut apud nos Thomas: ergo iure optimo Damascenus et 
Thomas copulabuntur, eo quidem magis quod Damascenus nonnulla logi- 
calia et prope metaphysicalia conscripsit. 
[24] Erunt itaque quinque paria theologiae principum ante thronum Dei 
et Agnum concinentia cum viginti quattuor illis senioribus. Canunt enim 
semper apud Deum scriptores rerum sanctarum. Primum par Basilius et 
Ambrosius, canens lyra; secundum Nazianzenus et Hieronymus, canens 
cithara; tertium Chrysostomus et Augustinus, canens psalterio; quartum 
Dionysius et Gregorius, canens tibia; quintum Damascenus et Thomas, 
canens cymbalis. Nec absurdum fuerit quinarium numerum nunc esse qui 
erat quaternarius, cum apud musicos quingque sint tetrachorda non quat- 
tuor, nec Thomam cymbalis fieri canentem. Ut enim Thomas geminus 
interpretatur, et ipse gemino sono theologiae pariter ac philosophiae 
canere delectatus est, ita cymbala gemino constant instrumento laetum, 
hilarem, plausibilem cantum reddentia. 
[25] Talis est Thomae librorum cantus. Hac harmonia sanctus Thomas et 
pios homines qui ipsum legunt et sanctos angelos qui nunc eum audiunt 
oblectat. Semper enim apud Deum cum aliis sanctis doctoribus modulatur 
et psallit, Agnum Dei assidue aut laudans aut pro nobis mortalibus obse- 
crans ut eodem perveniamus quo ipse pervenit. Quod nobis concedat qui 
vivit et regnat in saecula benedictus. Amen.!” 
7 Jn R, after “Amen”: “Oration of Lorenzo Valla, a most learned and eloquent man, which 
he held in praise of St. Thomas Aquinas in the Church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva, in the 
city of Rome, A.D. 1457, the seventh day of March. He died in the same year on the first day 
of August” (“Doctissimi viri ac eloquentissimi Laurentii e Valle oratio quam habuit in lau- 
dem Sancti Thomae Aquinatis in Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae Minervae, in urbe romana A.D. 
1457, VII die Martii; obiitque eodem anno die primo Augusti”). See Valla, Encomion sancti 
Thome, 55. 


[PDF page 335]
ENCOMIUM OF ST. THOMAS 315 
which few of our contemporaries set sail. Gregory!® lags far behind all in 
erudition, but he equals them in carefulness and diligence and is possessed 
of such great sweetness and holiness that he seems to speak like an angel. 
[23] I am afraid to set Thomas or any of the Latins equal to any one of 
these men. Rather, I would compare them with the same number of Greeks: 
Ambrose with Basil, whose rival I see he was; Jerome with Gregory 
Nazianzen, whose pupil and disciple he claimed to have been; Augustine 
with John Chrysostom, whom he often followed in his writings and emu- 
lated in the number of his books; Gregory with Dionysius the Areopagite, 
because he is the first of the Latins, as far as I know, to mention him (for the 
works of Dionysius were unknown to the others I named, not only the 
Latins but the Greeks as well). Closest to these comes John Damascene, a 
most famous author among the Greeks, as Thomas is amongst us. It will 
therefore be perfectly right for John and Thomas to be paired together, and 
all the more so because John wrote many logical and well-nigh metaphysi- 
cal works. 
[24] So there will be five pairs of princes of theology resounding before 
the throne of God and the Lamb, in unison with the twenty-four elders. For 
the writers of holy things always make music in the sight of God. The first 
pair is Basil and Ambrose, playing the lyre; the second, Nazianzen and 
Jerome, playing the cithara; the third, Chrysostom and Augustine, playing 
the psaltery; the fourth, Dionysius and Gregory, playing the flute; the fifth, 
John Damascene and Thomas, playing the cymbals. And it will not be 
unharmonious for their number to be five now instead of four — since for 
musicians there are five tetrachords, not four — nor to have Thomas playing 
the cymbals. For as the name Thomas means “twin,” and as he enjoyed play- 
ing equally in the twin tones of theology and philosophy, thus the cymbals 
are a double instrument emitting happy, cheerful, and pleasing music. 
[25] Such is the tune of Thomas’s books. With this harmony Saint Thomas 
delights both the pious men who read him and the holy angels who now 
hear him. For he is always singing and playing before God with the other 
holy doctors, perpetually either praising the Lamb of God, or entreating 
Him that we mortals may reach the same place he has. May it be granted us 
by Him who lives and reigns, praised unto eternity. Amen. 
18 Pope St. Gregory I (“the Great”). 


[PDF page 336]
< = * 
i] 
oe aMa- CAMETTITS WCRI ERY 
ee pid iennteabee egal Pirryngt tte snarestsanogins hiedomen Megat okay 
Gomeancd ab dane trate tihh hacen. unitierin me tremitala inpeicpiedoetrttenes 
- “Semen pill Aesyree >is serge amdpadoitilod tin eeunseswa inerrg fone ta” 
Ye bed eran laatppri gros iit e+ Reoraeers cenit toute jotta shells {enka © \y 
> tat varleautaidnse aisett wo oo cectpeeee 1 fdceven T\goelts: Suews stcoethield ©) 
as een? thw orurcat neers Hah ee em orive (Uae tht ag saci, ao 
stobboemsst srr od te dene Secan ts wet gt hogoepioniererstodd 
cite kann eynitizereln althsoddted teviiose yet in deanowy as! adobe 
eoeeagshgenynat eis erstanyiat Tot dyarirre plies? eld Wectititurgisdt tant 
; puthroreily «cudharntots werent; yooned pe aed cboalt tnd ntl be wriftoelt atop 
2 Qilsrenedianmas esti hil vcore crackin fave mie reap Wy 
himare gene sch: piten ane cat etalk Paamceboo, sqaaliihen 
dint aeidarsivencetuamod? ax Ghee? ach conan 
a ~ Bitadiepebean yal od eqeydalt bd teinl adUntgte qtionbtorqut 
tala re, rivets fret it: Dect reais sion adel ceneved or sworn reid tts” 
maf, aps yO Miata f yin ara a eck} elemento nt? Chi aah 
sePiad gm bancbsrrryed onal Meastoan pe becmtis? wited Gi) crite eet yetion 
we prsbsty waite yee ahs choy nessecet yin.) 7S ee 
| Setter an Othe tatpypred tant ote daueresEacs epee r'y:i Ais viset town dipeadt 
taka ation Ghersewilaag? “iz gactinty. ceestha 2 dliethes Geir 7 a 7 
asi 3% 7 | eo lgenaegeh baw moment serine: va kistoondt quetval th . 
= Gtale aT geslintlyg py ocerath beg cintwrioetcl tinaeott malt ye a ad 
a mage Corts watedionys mz SS pright aqenodt pensar pull. ; 
Saws “hahtebe bana ewtmbet weknt it thats ah & a gine 
guiuate, pera aeraacun! 140 abot per ien aes idee ath F 4 
0 alten pub etlaednca ti th eety opment aren 6 @sereebtcofnal im ‘ , Linden ota: nuttl eaicgenerttein, Ante epradeod? Ve 2 wettot aiwi ant Per 
| RAs ly bane hineedeyeqad ymitarcinemeiciwShoimet — 5 7 pear Eeae? gro apm allindt hatwert eee ort? tosis adtebriwa gant ; sitio nst i deagnar obetSeabe dates osxnd bm aiiter Aomieesicgestt rdsorkortnlietbeds 
es Ap eden quincy brdvgeteneerrewib ia roctvatit loth inet 
matatar de Ay URh Vora boone gutphabey rarity Ghai sepdals emrge _ pd Mente lal ebrotiey warfare das yout elarroin-ow tnt . md ders wt heater eagist ina esvil ow wth | | ' — 
P 2B eey ‘Ae aan sgt Leyeaem valle + cove beerned sind elvguamns maat-9 ied Gh) pate of 0 Cleennae Apuiges made Tei od cous Meats pupa been raw oD low, 0.71 aa, dee a1 diary ot Moved, she Sons aca os td 
pai als haga? “Tirtealal vil a Geopentiemns lagwntd« med qr tomy Font These Aageih neues uate cca eee 
tame VD — hidipee combere tired he pelts ageetty, 
ew Cad at" aa 4 
> ah 


[PDF page 337]
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
MANUSCRIPT AND ARCHIVAL SOURCES 
Brussels, Bibliotheque Royale, 4031-4033. 
Florence, Archivio di Stato, Signori, Carteggi, Legazioni e Commissarie, Reg. 12. 
Florence, Biblioteca Laurenziana, Conv. soppr. 187. 
Modena, Biblioteca Estense Universitaria, Lat. 151 (alpha T.6.15). 
Naples, Biblioteca dei Gerolamini, M. XXVVII.2.15. 
Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale de France, Lat. 6174. 
, Lat. 6471. 
——, Lat. 7723. 
, Lat. 7811 A. 
Rome, Biblioteca Angelica, 1500. 
Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Ott. lat. 2075. 
——,, Pal. lat. 1759. 
——,, Urb. lat. 1207. 
PRIMARY SOURCES 
Acta Capitulorum Generalium Ordinis Praedicatorum. Ed. Benedictus Maria Reichert. 
g vols. Roma: In domo generalitia, 1898-1904. In Monumenta Ordinis fratrum 
Praedicatorum historia, vols. 3-4, 8-14. 
Alberti, Leon Battista. LArchitettura. Latin text and Italian translation by Giovanni Orlandi. 
Milano: Edizioni I] Polifilo, 1966. 
Aristotle. The “Art” of Rhetoric. Tr. John Henry Freese. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 1926. 
Augustine. De doctrina christiana. Ed. Josef Martin. Turnhout: Brepols, 1962. Corpus 
Christianorum, Series Latina 32. Earlier edition in PL 3415-122. 
Boethius. De Musica. In PL 63:1167-1300. 
Bracciolini, Poggio. Epistolae. Ed. Tommaso Tonelli. 3 vols. Firenze: L. Marchini, 1832-1861. 
. Invectiva in L. Vallam I. In idem, Opera omnia, 1:188-205. 
——. Lettere. Ed. Helene Harth. 3 vols., Firenze: Olschki, 1984-1987. 
—. Opera omnia. Ed. Riccardo Fubini, 4 vols. Torino: Bottega d’Erasmo, 1964-1969. 
. Two Renaissance Book Hunters: The Letters of Poggius Bracciolini to Nicolaus de 
Niccolis. Tr. Phyllis Walter Goodhart Gordon. New York: Columbia University Press, 1974. 
Breviarium iuxta ritum Ordinis Praedicatorum. Ed. Michael Browne. 2 vols. Roma: Sabina, 
1962. 
Burchard, Johann. Diarium, sive, Rerum urbanarum commentarii (1483-1506). Ed. 
L. Thuasne. 3 vols. Paris: Emest Leroux, 1883-1885. 
——. Liber notarum: ab anno 1483 usque ad annum 1506. Ed. Enrico Celani. 14 fasc. in 4 vols. 
Citta di Castello: S. Lapi, 1907-1942. 
Cajetan, Tommaso de Vio. Prima Secundae Partis Summae Sacrae Theologiae Sancti 
Thomae ... Caietani commentariis illustrata. Lugduni [Lyon], 1558. 
Cicero, De oratore. Tr. E.W. Sutton and H. Rackham. 2 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1988. 
Erasmus, Desiderius. Adagia. Sei saggi politici in forma di proverbi. Ed. Silvana Seidel 
Menchi. Torino: Einaudi, 1980. 


[PDF page 338]
318 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
——. Hieronymi stridonensis vita. In idem, Opuscula, 125-190. English translation by James 
F. Brady and John C. Olin in Collected Works of Erasmus, vol. 61: The Patristic Scholarship, 
the Edition of Jerome (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1992), 15-62. 
—. Opera omnia. Ed. Joannes Clericus [Jean LeClerc]. 10 vols. Lugduni Batavorum 
[Leiden]: cura et impensis Petri Vander Aa, 1703-1706. Facsimile reprint = Hildesheim: 
Olds, 1962. 
—. Opera omnia. Amsterdam: North Holland, 1969-. 
—. Opuscula. Ed. Wallace K. Ferguson. The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1933. 
Garin, Eugenio (ed. and tr.). Prosatori latini del Quattrocento. Milano: R. Ricciardi, 1952. 
Gaspare da Verona. De gestis tempore Pauli II. In idem, Le vite di Paolo II di Gaspare da 
Verona e Michele Canensi, ed. Giuseppe Zippel. Citta di Castello: S. Lapi, 1904. 
Guglielmo da Tocco. Vita S. Thomae Aquinatis. Fasc. 2 of Fontes vitae S. Thomae Aquinatis. 
Ed. D. Pritmmer. Saint Maximin, Var: Libr. Saint-Thomas-d’Aquin, 1924. 
Humbertus De Romanis. De vita regulari. Ed. Joachim Joseph Berthier. 2 vols. Torino: 
Marietti, 1956. 
Innocent III. Sermo de sancto Silvestro. In PL 217:481—484. 
Jerome [Hieronymus]. Commentariorum in Danielem libri III. Ed. Franciscus Glorie. 
Turnhout: Brepols, 1964. Corpus Christianorum Series Latina, 75 A. 
—. Contra Rufinum. In PL 23:397—492. 
——.. Epistola ad Ctesiphontem (ep. 133). In PL 22147-1161. English translation available in 
Schaff and Wace (eds.), Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, vol. 6. 
——. Epistola ad Eustochium (ep. 22). In PL 22:394—425. English translation available in 
Schaff and Wace (eds.), Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, vol. 6. 
——. Epistola ad Magnum oratorem (ep. 70). In PL 22:664—-668. English translation avail- 
able in Schaff and Wace (eds.), Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, vol. 6. 
——. Epistola ad Pammachium (ep. 57: De optimo genere interpretandi). In PL 22:568-579. 
English translation available in Schaff and Wace (eds.), Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, 
vol. 6. 
——.. Epistola ad Pammachium (ep. 66). In PL 22:639—-647. English translation available in 
Schaff and Wace (eds.), Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, vol. 6. 
——. Fpistulae. Ed. Isidorus Hilberg. 3 vols. Vienna: F. Tempsky, 1910-1918. Corpus scripto- 
rum ecclesiasticorum latinorum, 54-56. 
——.. In epistulam ad Galatas. In PL 26:307—438. 
—. In Isaiam. In PL 2417-704. 
——.. Praefatio in libros Salomonis. In PL 28:1241-1244. 
Lactantius, Divinarum institutionum libri VII. In PL 6:1-822. 
Luther, Martin. Martin Luthers Werke. Kritische Gesamtausgabe. Part 4: Briefwechsel. Vol. 2, 
ed. J. Ficker. Weimar: H. Bohlaus Nachfolger, 1931. 
Mansi, Giovan Domenico (ed.). Sacrorum conciliorum nova et amplissima collectio. 53 vols. 
Paris: H. Welter, 1901-1927. 
Nicola de Aymo. La grammatica latino-volgare di Nicola de Aymo (Lecce, 1444). Ed. Maria 
dEnghien. Galatino: Congedo, 2008. 
Panegyrici veteres. Ed. Jacobus De La Baune, with notes by Christian Schwarz. Venice: 
Javarina: 1728. 
Peter Damian. On Divine Omnipotence. In idem, Peter Damian: Letters 91-120, tr. Owen if 
Blum. Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 1998. 
PL = Patrologiae cursus completus. Series Latina. Ed. J.-P. Migne. 221 vols. Paris: Garniere 
Fratres, 1844-1864. 
Pliny the Younger. Letters and Panegyricus. Tr. Betty Radice. 2 vols. London: Heinemann, 
1969. 
Quintilian. Institutio oratoria. Tr. E.H. Butler. 4 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 1920-1922. 
——.. Listituzione oratoria. Ed. and tr. Rino Faranda. 2 vols. Torino: UTET, 1968. 


[PDF page 339]
BIBLIOGRAPHY 319 
Peterson, W. (ed.). Quintiliani Institutionis oratoriae liber X, by Quintilian. Oxford: 
Clarendon, 1903. 
Schaff, Philip and Henry Wace (eds.). Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Second Series. 14 vols. 
New York: Christian Literature publishing Co., 1890-1900. Vol. 6 (1893) = St. Jerome: 
Letters and Select Works, tr. W.H. Fremantle, G. Lewis, and W.G. Martley, on-line at: 
http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/300133.htm. 
S. Thomae Aquinatis vitae fontes praecipuae. Ed. Angelico Ferrua. Alba: Edizioni domeni- 
cane, 1968. 
Thomas Aquinas. Contra impugnantes Dei cultum et religionem = Idem. Opera omnia, iussu 
Leonis XIII edita. Vol. 41. Roma: St. Thomas Aquinas Foundation, 1970. 
——. Expositio super librum Boethii de Trinitate. Ed. Bruno Decker. Leiden: Brill, 1965. 
English translation = The Trinity and the Unicity of the Intellect, tr. Rose Emmanuella 
Brennan (St. Louis: B. Herder, 1946). 
. Summa theologiae. Tr. Fathers of the English Dominican Province. New York: 
Benziger Bros., 1948. 
. Super Epistolas s. Pauli lectura. 2 vols. Torino: Marietti, 1953. 
Valeriano, Pierio. Hieroglyphica. Lugduni [Lyon]: Sumptibus Pauli Frelon, 1602. Reprint = 
New York: Garland, 1976. 
Valla, Lorenzo. Ad Alfonsum regem Epistola de duobus Tarquiniis and Confutationes in 
Benedictum Morandum, ed. Francesco Lo Monaco. Firenze: Polistampa, 2009. 
. Adnotationes in Novum Testamentum. In idem, Opera omnia, 1:803-895. 
——.. Antidotum in Pogium IV. In idem, Opera omnia, 1:325-366. 
. Collatio Novi Testamenti. Redazione inedita a cura di Alessandro Perosa. Firenze: 
Sansoni, 1970. 
. De falso credita et ementita Constantini donatione. Ed. Wolfram Setz. Weimar: 
Boéhlau, 1976. Monumenta Germaniae Historica, Quellen zur Geistesgeschichte des 
Mittelalters, 10. 
. De libero arbitrio. In Garin (ed.), Prosatori latini del Quattrocento, 523-565. English 
translation = On Free Will, tr. Charles Trinkaus, in The Renaissance Philosophy of Man, ed. 
Emst Cassirer, Paul Oskar Kristeller, and John Herman Randall (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press), 1948, 155-182. 
——.. De professione religiosorum. Ed. Mariarosa Cortesi. Padova: Antenore, 1986. 
. De vero falsoque bono. Ed. Maristella De Panizza Lorch. Bari: Adriatica, 1970. English 
translation = On Pleasure, De voluptate, trans. Kent Hieatt and Maristella Lorch 
(New York: Abaris Books, 1977). 
—.. Dialectical Disputations. Ed. and tr. Brian P. Copenhaver and Lodi Nauta. 2 vols. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2012. 
——. Dialogue sur le libre-arbitre. Ed. Jacques Chomarat. Paris: Vrin, 1983. 
——.. Elegantiae, Book IV, Preface. In Garin (ed.), Prosatori latini del Quattrocento, 612-622. 
. Emendationes quorundam locorum ex Alexandro ad Alfonsum primum Aragonum 
regem. Ed. Clementina Marsico. Firenze: Polistampa, 2009. 
. Encomio de Santo Tomds de Aquino. Tr. Francesco Adorno. In Valla, Oraciones y 
Prefacios, 290-321. 
. Encomion sancti Thomae. Ed. J. Vahlen. In Vierteljahrsschrift fiir Kultur und Litteratur 
der Renaissance 1 (1886): 384-396. Facsimile reprint in Valla, Opera omnia, 2:339-352. 
—. Encomion sancti Thome Aquinatis. Ed. Stefano Cartei. Firenze: Polistampa, 2008. 
——. Encomium S. Thomae. Ed. G. Bertocci. Roma, 1888. 
——. Epistole. Ed. Ottavio Besomi and Mariangela Regoliosi. Padova: Antenore, 1984. 
——. Gesta Ferdinandi Regis. Ed. Ottavio Besomi. Padova: Antenore, 1973. 
—. In lode di S. Tommaso d’Aquino. Tr. Giorgio Radetti. In Valla, Scritti filosofici e religiosi, 
455-469. 
aE, Praise of Saint Thomas Aquinas. Tr. M. Esther Hanley. In Renaissance Philosophy: 
New Translations, ed. Leonard A. Kennedy. The Hague: Mouton, 1973, 17-27. 


[PDF page 340]
320 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
—. On the Donation of Constantine. Tr. G.W. Bowersock. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 2007. 
——. Opera omnia. Ed. Eugenio Garin. 2 vols. Torino: Bottega d’Erasmo, 1962. 
—. Oraciones y Prefacios. Ed. Francesco Adorno. Santiago: Universidad de Chile, 
1955. 
=e Onto in principio sui studii. In Orazione per linaugurazione dellanno accademico 
1455-1456. Atti di un seminario di filologia umanistica, ed. S. Rizzo. Roma: Roma nel 
Rinascimento, 1994, 192-200. 
——. Le postille all’ Institutio oratoria di Quintiliano. Ed. Lucia Cesarini Martinelli and 
Alessandro Perosa. Padova: Antenore, 1996. 
——. Pro se et contra calumniatores ad Eugenium IV. Pont. Max. Apologia. In idem, Opera 
omnia, 1:795—800a. 
——. Raudensiane note. Ed. Gian Matteo Corrias. Firenze: Polistampa, 2007. 
——. Repastinatio dialectice et philosophie. Ed. Gianni Zippel. 2 vols. Padova: Antenore, 
1982. 
—.. Scritti filosofici e religiosi. Ed. and tr. Giorgio Radetti. Firenze: Sansoni, 1953. 
Vasari, Giorgio. Lives of the Painters, Sculptors and Architects. Tr. Gaston du C. de Vere. 
New York: Knopf, 1996. 
SECONDARY SOURCES 
Abbiati, Franco. Storia della musica. 4 vols. Milano: Garzanti, 1967-1974. 
Alberti, Giovan Battista. “Lorenzo Valla tradutore di Tucidide.” In Tradizione classica e let- 
teratura umanistica per Alessandro Perosa, ed. Roberto Cardini et al. Roma: Bulzoni, 
1985, 243-253. 
. “Tucidide nella traduzione latina di Lorenzo Valla,” Studi italiani di filologia classica, 
N.S., 29 (1957): 224-249. 
— (ed.). Introduction to Thucydidis Historiae, by Thucydides. 3 vols. Roma: Typis publi- 
cae officinae polygraphicae, 1972-2000. Vol. 1 (1972). 
Alféldi, Andreas. Costantino tra paganesimo e cristianesimo. Tr. Augusto Fraschetti. Bari: 
Laterza, 1976. English edition = The Conversion of Constantine and Pagan Rome, tr. 
Harold Mattingly (Oxford: Clarendon, 1948). 
Ashworth, EJ. Language and Logic in the Post-Medieval Period. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1974. 
Atti del Congresso internazionale (Roma-Napoli, 17-24 aprile 1974): Tommaso dAquino nel 
suo settimo centenario. 9 vols. Napoli: Edizioni domenicane italiane, 1975-1978. 
Auerbach, Erich. Literary Language and its Public in Late Latin Antiquity and in the Middle 
Ages. New York: Pantheon Books, 1965. 
——.. Lingua letteraria e pubblico nella tarda antichita e nel Medioevo. Milano: Feltrinelli, 
1974. 
Baciocchi de Péon, Maria. Il Chiostro Verde e la Cappella degli Spagnoli. Firenze: Lumacchi, 
1900. 
Baron, Hans. The Crisis of the Early Italian Renaissance: Civic Humanism and Republican 
Liberty in an Age of Classicism and Tyranny. 2 vols. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1955 
Barozzi, Luciano and Remigio Sabbadini. Studi sul Panormita e sul Valla. Firenze: Le 
Monnier, 18691. 
Bates, Thomas R. “Gramsci and the Theory of Hegemony,’ Journal of the History of Ideas 36 
(1975), 351-66. 
Baxandall, Michael. Giotto and the Orators. Humanist Observers of Painting in Italy and the 
Discovery of Pictorial Composition: 1350-1450. Oxford: Clarendon, 1971. 
Béné, Charles. Erasme et saint Augustin, ou Influence de saint Augustin sur l’humanisme 
dErasme. Geneve: Droz, 1969. 


[PDF page 341]
BIBLIOGRAPHY 321 
Bertelli, Carlo. “Appunti sugli affreschi nella Cappella Carafa alla Minerva” Archivum 
Fratrum Praedicatorum 35 (1965): 115-130. 
Berthier, J.-J. Léglise de la Minerve a Rome. Roma: Cooperativa tipografica Manuzio, 1910. 
- Le triomphe de Saint Thomas, patron et protecteur des écoles catholiques peint par 
Taddeo Gaddi dans la Chapelle des Espagnoles a Florence. Etude d’histoire et dart. 
Fribourg (Switzerland): Saint Paul, 1897. 
Besomi, Ottavio and Mariangela Regoliosi (eds.). Lorenzo Valla e 'umanesimo italiano. Atti 
del Convegno internazionale di studi umanistici (Parma, 18-19 ottobre 1984). Padova: 
Antenore, 1986. 
Bischoff, Bernhard. Latin Palaeography: Antiquity and the Middle Ages. Tr. Daibhi 6 Croinin 
and David Ganz. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
Blanchard, W. Scott. “The Negative Dialectic of Lorenzo Valla: A Study in the Pathology of 
Opposition,” Renaissance Studies 14 (2000): 149-189. 
Blunt, Anthony and Hereward Lester Cooke. The Roman Drawings of the XVII and XVIII 
Centuries in the Collection of Her Majesty the Queen at Windsor Castle. London: Phaidon, 
1960. 
Boehner, Philotheus. The Tractatus de praedestinatione et de praescientiae Dei et de futu- 
ris contingentibus of William Ockham. New York: Franciscan Institute, 1945. 
Bolgar, R.R. The Classical Heritage and its Beneficiaries. London: Cambridge University 
Press, 1973. 
Bowersock, G.W. Introduction to Valla, On the Donation of Constantine, vi-xv. 
Bowles, Edmund Addison. “La Hiérarchie des instruments dans l'Europe féodale,” Revue de 
Musicologie 42 (1958): 155-169. 
Brezzi, Paolo and Maristella De Panizza Lorch (eds.). Umanesimo a Roma nel Quattrocento. 
Roma: Istituto di Studi Romani, 1984. 
Brown, Peter. Augustine of Hippo. A Biography. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1969. 
Buchwald, Wolfgang, Armin Hohlweg, and Otto Prinz (eds.). Tusculum-Lexicon griechischer 
und lateinischer Autoren des Altertums und des Mittelalters. Miinchen: Artemis, 1982. 
Bullard, Melissa Meriam. “The Renaissance Project of Knowing: Lorenzo Valla and 
Salvatore Camporeale’s Contributions to the Querelle between Rhetoric and Philosophy,” 
Journal of the History of Ideas 66 (2005): 477-81. 
(ed.). Salvatore Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla, Humanism, and Theology, a special section 
of Journal of the History of Ideas 66 (2005): 477-556: Salvatore Camporeale, Lorenzo Valla, 
Humanism, and Theology. 
The Cambridge History of the Bible. 3 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1963-1970. 
Camporeale, Salvatore I. Amore e conoscenza nell’esperienza mistica secondo lAquinate. 
Viterbo: Agnesotti, 1961. Originally published in Sapienza 12 (1959): 237-271 and 13 (1960): 
360-381. 
——. “Da Lorenzo Valla a Tommaso Moro. Lo statuto umanistico della teologia,” Memorie 
Domenicane, n.s., 4 (1973): 9-102. Reprinted in idem, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma 
e controriforma, 19-119. 
. “Giovanmaria dei Tolosani O.P.: 1530-1546. Umanesimo, Riforma e teologia contro- 
versista,” Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 17 (1986): 145-252. Reprinted in idem Lorenzo Valla. 
Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma, 331-461. 
—. “Giovanni Tolosani, O.P. e la teologia antiumanistica agl’inizi della Riforma. 
LOpusculum antivalliano De Constantini Donatione.” In Xenia Medii Aevi historiam illus- 
trantia oblata Thomae Kaeppeli, ed. Raymundus Creytens and Pius Kiinzle. Roma: 
Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 1978, 809-831. 
. “Lorenzo Valla e il De falso credita donatione. Retorica, liberta ed ecclesiologia nel 
‘400,” Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 19 (1988): 191-293. Reprinted in idem, Lorenzo Valla. 
Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma, 463-589. English translation in the present 
volume, pp. 17-143. 


[PDF page 342]
322 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
—. “Lorenzo Valla. Repastinatio, liber primus: retorica e linguaggio.” In Lorenzo Valla e 
l'umanesimo italiano, ed. Besomi and Regoliosi, 217-239. 
—. “Lorenzo Valla tra Medioevo e Rinascimento. Encomion s. Thomae — 1457,” Memorie 
Domenicane, n.s., 7 (1976): 1-194. Reprinted in idem, Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma 
e controriforma, 121-330. English translation in the present volume, pp. 145-296. 
. Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo e teologia. Firenze: Istituto nazionale di studi sul 
Rinascimento, 1972. 
——. Lorenzo Valla. Umanesimo, riforma e controriforma. Studi e testi. Roma: Edizioni di 
Storia e Letteratura, 2002. 
. “Poggio Bracciolini contro Valla. Le Orationes in L. Vallam.” In Poggio Bracciolini:1380- 
1980: nel VI centenario della nascita. Firenze: Sansoni, 1982, 137-161. 
——. “Umanesimo e teologia tra ‘400 e ‘500.” In Problemi di storia della Chiesa nei secoli 
XV-XVII. Napoli: Edizioni Dehoniane, 1979, 137-164. 
Cantimori, Delio. Eretici italiani del Cinquecento. Firenze: Sansoni, 1939. 
Il cardinale Tomaso de Vio Gaetano nel IV centenario della sua morte. Milano: Vita e pen- 
siero, 1935. Special issue of Rivista di filosofia neo-scolastica. 
Carderi, B. “I Registri del ‘Collegio S. Tommaso d’Aquino’ in Roma, conservati nell’archivio 
del convento di S. Maria sopra Minerva,” Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 7 (1976): 346-358. 
Carpenter, Nan Cooke. Music in the Medieval and Renaissance Universities. Norman: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1958. 
Cavazza, Silvano. “La cronologia degli Antibarbari e le origini del pensiero religioso di 
Erasmo,” Rinascimento, sey. 2, 15 (1975): 141-179. 
—. “La formazione culturale di Erasmo,’ La Cultura 13 (1975): 20-40. 
Celenza, Christopher S. “Lorenzo Valla and the Traditions and Transmissions of Philosophy,” 
Journal of the History of Ideas 66 (2005): 483-506. 
. “Lorenzo Valla’s Radical Philology: The “Preface” to the Annotations to the New 
Testament in Context,’ Journal of Medieval and Early Modern Studies 42:2 (2012): 
365-394. 
——.. The Lost Italian Renaissance: Humanists, Historians, and Latin’s Legacy. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004. 
Cesarini Martinelli, Lucia. “Le postille di Lorenzo Valla all’ Institutio Oratoria di Quintiliano.” 
In Besomi and Regoliosi (eds.), L. Valla e 'wmanesimo italiano, 21-50. 
Chenu, Marie-Dominique. “Antiqui, ‘moderni’ Notes de lexicographie médiévale,” Revues 
des Sciences Philosophiques et Théologiques 17 (1928): 82-94. 
——. La Théologie comme science au XIIIme siécle. Paris: Vrin, 1943. 
Chodorow, Stanley. Christian Political Theory and Church Politics in the Mid-Twelfth Century. 
The Ecclesiology of Gratian’s Decretum. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972. 
Ciabattoni, Francesco and Susanna Barsella (eds.). The Humanist’s Workshop: Special Issue 
on Salvatore I. Camporeale. Special issue of Italian Quarterly, vol. 46 (179-182 = Winter to 
Fall, 2009). 
Ciliberto, Michele. Eugenio Garin: Un intellettuale nel Novecento. Roma: Laterza, 2011. 
Clanchy, M.T. From Memory to Written Record: England, 1066-1307. Oxford: Wiley- Blackwell, 
2013. 
Copenhaver, Brian P. “Valla Our Contemporary: Philosophy and Philology,’ Journal of the 
History of Ideas 66 (2005): 507-25. 
Courcelle, Pierre Paul. La Consolation de Philosophie dans la tradition littéraire. Antécédents 
et postérité de Boéce. Paris: Etudes Augustiniennes, 1967. 
Curtius, Ernst Robert. European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages. London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, 1953. 
Davis, Charles Till. Dante and the Idea of Rome. Oxford: Clarendon, 1957. 
. Dante’s Italy and other Essays. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1984. 
De Caprio, Vincenzo. “Appunti sul classicismo delle Eleganze di Lorenzo Valla,” Annali della 
Facolta di Lettere e Filosofia, Istituto di filologia moderna, Universita di Roma 1:2 (1981): 
59-80. 


[PDF page 343]
BIBLIOGRAPHY 323 
- “Retorica e ideologia nella Declamatio di Lorenzo Valla sulla donazione di 
Costantino,” Paragone-Letteratura 29, n. 338 (1978): 36-56. 
. “La rinascita della cultura a Roma: la tradizione latina nelle Eleganze di Lorenzo 
Valla.” In Brezzi and Lorch (eds.), Umanesimo a Roma nel Quattrocento. Roma: Istituto di 
Studi Romani, 1984. 
Degl’Innocenti, Umberto. “Capreolo, Giovanni.” In Enciclopedia Cattolica, 3:719-722. 
- ‘De Vio, Tommaso detto il Gaetano.” In Enciclopedia Cattolica, 4:1506-1509. 
De Leo, Pietro. Gioacchino da Fiore. Aspetti inediti della vita e delle opere. Soveria Mannelli: 
Rubbettino Editore, 1988. 
. Ricerche sui falsi medievali, I. Il Constitutum Constantini. Note e documenti per una 
nuova lettura. Reggio Calabria: Meridionali Riuniti, 1974. 
Delph, Ronald Keith. “Italian Humanism in the Early Reformation: Agostino Steuco (1497- 
1548).” Ph.D. dissertation in History, University of Michigan, 1987. 
Di Napoli, Giovanni. Lorenzo Valla. Filosofia e religione nell’Umanesimo italiano. Roma: 
Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 1971. 
Enciclopedia Cattolica. 12 vols. Citta del Vaticano: Ente per |’Enciclopedia cattolica e per il 
Libro cattolico, 1948-1954. 
Fabro, Cornelio. Breve introduzione al tomismo. Roma: Desclee, 1960. 
Farris, Giovanni and Benedetto Tino Delfino (eds.). Jacopo da Varagine, Atti del I Convegno 
di Studi (Varazze, 13-14 aprile, 1985). Cogoleto: Edizioni SMA, 1987. 
Ferlauto, Filippo. Jl testo di Tucidide e la traduzione latina di Lorenzo Valla. Palermo: 
Universita di Palermo, Istituto di filologia greca, 1979. 
Ferrau, Giacomo. “La concezione storiografica del Valla: i Gesta Ferdinandi Regis Aragonum. 
In Lorenzo Valla e 'umanesimo italiano, ed. Besomi and Regoliosi, 265-310. 
Ferreti, L. “Un ‘trionfo’ di S$. Tommaso nella chiesa dei Domenicani in Tivoli.” In San 
Tommaso dAquino O.P. Miscellanea storico-artistica, ed. Innocenzo Taurisano. Roma: A. 
Manuzio, 1924. 
Flasch, Kurt. Das philosophische Denken im Mittelalter. Von Augustin zu Machiavelli. 
Stuttgart: Reclam, 1986. 
Floris, Ennio. Sous le Christ, Jésus: méthode danalyse référentielle appliquée aux évangiles. 
Paris: Flammarion, 1987. 
Fois, Mario. I/ pensiero cristiano di Lorenzo Valla nel quadro storico-culturale del suo ambi- 
ente. Roma: Libreria editrice dell’Universita Gregoriana, 1969. 
Francastel, Pierre. Etudes de sociologie dart. Paris: Denoél/Gonthier, 1970. 
. Studi di sociologia dell‘arte. Tr. Andrea Zanzotto. Milan: Rizzoli, 1976. 
Fremantle, Richard. Florentine Gothic Painters. From Giotto to Masaccio. London: Secker & 
Warburg, 1975. 
Fried, Johannes. Donation of Constantine and Constitutum Constantini: The Misinterpretation 
of a Fiction and its Original Meaning. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2007. 
Frugoni, Arsenio. Jncontri nel Medioevo. Bologna: I] mulino, 1979. 
Fubini, Riccardo. “Biondo Flavio,” Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani 10 (1968): 536-539. 
——. “Intendimenti umanistici e riferimenti patristici dal Petrarca al Valla,’ Giornale 
Storico della Letteratura Italiana 151 (1974): 520-578. 
. “Note su Lorenzo Valla e la composizione del De voluptate.” In I classici nel Medioevo 
e nell’Umanesimo. Miscellanea filologica. Genova: Universita di Genova, Istituto di 
Filologia Classica e Medioevale, 1975, 1-57. 
——. “Papato e storiografia nel Quattrocento. Storia, biografia e propaganda in un recente 
studio,” Studi medievali, III s., 18, fasc. I (1977): 321-351. 
. “Richerche sul De voluptate di Lorenzo Valla,’ Medioevo e Rinascimento 1 (1987): 
189-239. 
Furet, Francois. Interpreting the French Revolution. Tr. Elborg Forster. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1981. 
Gaeta, Franco. Lorenzo Valla. Filologia e storia nell’Umanesimo italiano. Napoli: Istituto ital- 
iano per gli studi storici, 1955. 


[PDF page 344]
324 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Garin, Eugenio. Leducazione in Europa 1400/1600. Problemi e programmi. Bari: Laterza, 
1976. 
—. History of Italian Philosophy. Ed. and tr. Giorgio Pinton. 2 vols. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 
2008. 
——.. La filosofia come sapere storico. Roma: Laterza, 1990. 
—. Rinascite e Rivoluzioni. Movimenti culturali dal XIV al XVIII secolo. Bari: Laterza, 1975. 
——. Scienza e vita civile nel Rinascimento italiano. Bari: Laterza, 1965. 
——. L’umanesimo italiano: filosofia e vita civile nel Rinascimento. Bari: Laterza, 1957. 
Original German edition = Der italienische Humanismus (Bern: Francke, 1947). English 
translation = Italian Humanism: Philosophy and Civic Life in the Renaissance, tr. Peter 
Munz (Oxford: Blackwell, 1965). 
Gerl, Hanna-Barbara. Rhetorik als Philosophie. Lorenzo Valla. Miinchen: Fink, 1974. 
Gheyn, J. van den. “Nicolas Maniacoria, correcteur de la Bible,’ Revue Biblique 8 (1899): 
289-295. 
Giannelli, Giulio and Santo Mazzarino. Trattato di storia romana. 2 vols. Roma: Tumminelli, 
1962. 
Glorieux, P. “La premiére pénétration thomiste et son probleme,” Revue dApologétique 53 
(1931): 257-275, 385-510. . Les premiéres polémiques thomistes. Vol. 1: Le Correctorium corruptorii “Quare.” Kain: 
Revue des sciences philosophiques et théologiques, 1927. 
Grabmann, Martin. “Joannes Capreolus, der ‘Princeps Thomistarum’ und seine Stellung 
in der Geschichte der Thomistenschule,” Divus Thomas (Freiburg) 22 (1944): 85-109, 
145-170. 
——. Mittelalterliches Geistesleben. 3 vols. Miinchen: Hueber, 1926-1956. 
——. “La scuola tomista italiana nel sec. XIII e principio del XIV sec.,” Rivista di filosofia 
neoscolastica 15 (1923): 97—-155- 
——.. “Die Stellung des Kardinals Cajetan in der Geschichte des Thomismus,’ Angelicum, 
1 (1934): 547-560. 
. Die theologische Erkenntnis- und Einleitungslehre des hl. Thomas von Aquin, auf Grund 
seiner Schrift In Boethium de Trinitate, 2 Zusammenhang der Scholastik des 13. und 
beginnenden 14. Jahrhunderts dargestellt. Freiburg, Switzerland: Paulus, 1948. 
Gramsci, Antonio. I/ materialismo storico e la filosofia di Benedetto Croce. Torino: Einaudi, 
1966. 
. Quaderni del carcere. Ed. Valentino Gerratana. 4 vols. Torino: Einaudi, 1975. 
Hankins, James (ed.). Renaissance Civic Humanism: Reappraisals and Reflections. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Hay, Denys. “Flavio Biondo and the Middle Ages,” Proceedings of the British Academy 45 
(1960): 97-128. Reprinted in idem, Renaissance Essays (London: Hambledon, 1988), 
32-66. 
Headley, John M. “The Reformation as Crisis in the Understanding of Tradition,” Archiv fiir 
Reformationsgeschichte 78 (1987): 5-22. 
Heer, Friedrich. Die Dritte Kraft. Der europdische Humanismus zwischen den Fronten des 
Konfessionellen Zeitalters. Frankfurt: S. Fischer, 1959. 
Hiatt, Alfred. The Making of Medieval Forgeries: False Documents in Fifteenth-Century 
England. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
Hofmann, W. von. Forschungen zur Geschichte der kurialen Behérden vom Schisma bis zur 
Reformation. 2 vols. Rom: Loescher, 1914. 
Holeczek, Heinz. Humanistische Bibelphilologie als Reformproblem bei Erasmus von 
Rotterdam, Thomas More und William Tyndale. Leiden: Brill, 1975. 
Horst, Ulrich. Zwischen Konziliarismus und Reformation. Studien zur Ekklesiologie in 
Dominikanerorden. Roma: Istituto Storico Domenicano, 1985. 
Hughes, Andrew. Music: the Sixth Liberal Art. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1974. 
Ijsewijn, Jozef and Gilbert Tournoy. “Nuovi contributi per l’elenco dei manoscritti e delle 
edizioni a stampa delle Elegantiae di Lorenzo Valla,” Humanistica Lovaniensia 20 (1971): 
1-3. 


[PDF page 345]
BIBLIOGRAPHY 325 
- “Un primo censimento dei manoscritti e delle edizioni a stampa degli Elegantiarum 
linguae latinae libri sex di Lorenzo Vala,’ Humanistica Lovaniensia 18 (1969): 25-41. 
Impellizzeri, Salvatore. La letteratura bizantina. Firenze: Sansoni, 1975. 
Isaac, Jean. Le Peri hermeneias en Occident de Boéce a saint Thomas. Histoire litteraire d'un 
traité dAristote. Paris: Vrin, 1953. 
Kaeppeli, Thomas and Antonio Dondaine (eds.). Acta Capitulorum Provincialium Provinciae 
Romanae. Roma: Institutum Historicum Fratrum Praedicatorum, 1941. 
Kaftal, George. Iconography of the Saints in Central and South Italian Schools of Painting. 
Florence: Sansoni, 1965. 
. Iconography of the Saints in Tuscan Painting. Florence: Sansoni, 1952. 
Kelly, J.N.D. Jerome: His Life, Writings, and Controversies. London: Duckworth, 1975. 
Kohls, Ernst Wilhelm. Die Theologie des Erasmus. 2 vols. Basel: F. Reinhardt, 1966. 
Kraye, Jill. “Lorenzo Valla and Changing Perceptions of Renaissance Humanism,” 
Comparative Criticism 23 (2001): 37-55. 
Kristeller, Paul Oskar. Medieval Aspects of Renaissance Learning. Ed. and trans. Edward 
P. Mahoney. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1974. 
Ladner, Gerhart B. “The Concepts of ‘Ecclesia’ and ‘Christianitas, and their Relation to the 
Idea of ‘Plenitudo Potestatis’ from Gregory VII to Boniface VIII.” In idem, Images and 
Ideas in the Middle Ages. Selected Studies in History and Art. 2 vols. Roma: Edizioni di 
storia e letteratura, 1983, 487-515. 
Laurent, Marie-Hyacinthe. “Autour de la féte de saint Thomas,” Revue Thomiste 40 (1935): 
257-263. 
Leclercq, Jean. Cultura umanistica e desiderio di Dio. Firenze: Sansoni, 1965. Original French 
edition = Lamour des lettres et le désir de Dieu (Paris: Editions du Cerf, 1957). English 
translation = The Love of Learning and the Desire for God: A Study of Monastic Culture, tr. 
Catharine Masrahi (New York: Fordham University Press, 1961). 
Leeman, A.D. Orationis ratio. Teoria e pratica stilistica degli oratori, storici e filosofi latini. Ed. 
Elio Pasoli. Tr. Gian Carlo Giardina and Rita Cuccioli Melloni. Bologna: Societa editrice 
il Mulino, 1974. 
. Orationis ratio: The Stylistic Theories and Practices of the Roman Orators, Historians, 
and Philosophers. Amsterdam: A. M. Hakkert, 1963. 
Loenertz, R.-J. “En marge du Constitutum Constantini. Contribution a histoire du texte,” 
Revue des Sciences Philosophiques et Théologiques 59 (1975): 289-294. 
Lorch, Maristella De Panizza. A Defense of Life: Lorenzo Valla’s Theory of Pleasure. Miinchen: 
Fink, 1985. 
—. “Lorenzo Valla.” In Renaissance Humanism: Foundations, Forms, and Legacy, ed. 
Alfred Rabil, 3 vols. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1988, 1:332—49. 
Lubac, Henri de. Exégése Médiévale. Les quatre sens de l'Ecriture. 2 vols. Paris: Aubier, 
1959. 
Maccarrone, Michele. Vicarius Christi. Storia del titolo papale. Roma: Facultas Theologica 
Pontificii Athenaei Lateranensis, 1952. 
Maier, Alfonso. Terminologia logica della tarda Scolastica. Roma: Ateneo, 1972. 
Mancini, Girolamo. Vita di Lorenzo Valla. Firenze: Sansoni, 1891. 
Mandonnet, Pierre. “Il cardinal Gaetano (1468-1534),’ Memorie Domenicane 48 (1931): 
8-102. 
: . “Fréres Précheurs (la théologie dans lordre des).” In Dictionnaire de théologie 
catholique. Paris: Letouzey et Ané, 1923-1972, 6:863-924. 
. Siger de Brabant et lAverroisme latin au XIllme siécle. 2 vols. Louvain: Institut supéri- 
eur de philosophie de l'Université, 1908-19n. 
Mariani, Valerio. “L’arte di Filippino Lippi.” In Saggi su Filippino Lippi. Firenze: Arnaud, 
1957, 71-84. 
Marino, Eugenio. “Eugenio IV e la storiografia di Flavio Biondo,’ Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 
4 (1973): 240-287. 
. “Umanesimo e teologia. A proposito della recente storiografia su Lorenzo Valla,’ 
Memorie Domenicane, n.s., 3 (1972): 198-218. 


[PDF page 346]
326 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Marmo, Costantino. Semiotica e linguaggio nella scolastica: Parigi, Bologna, Erfurt, 1270- 
7330. Roma: Istituto Storico Italiano per il Medio Evo, 1994. 
Marrou, Henri-Irénée. Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture antique. Paris: E. de Boccard, 
1958. 
Martimort, Aimé Georges. La Chiesa in preghiera. Introduzione alla liturgia. Roma: Descleé, 
1966. 
Martini, Giuseppe. “Alcune considerazioni sulla dottrina gelasiana,” Nuova Rivista Storica 
65 (Jan.-Apr., 1981), fase. I-II (Scritti di Giuseppe Martini): 282-292. 
——.. “Per la storia dei pontificati di Niccolo IV e Bonifacio VIII,” Nuova Rivista Storica 65 
(Jan.-Apr., 1981), fase. I-II (Scritti di Giuseppe Martini): 157-190. 
——. “Regale Sacerdotium,” Nuova Rivista Storica 65 (Jan.-Apr., 1981), fasc. I-II (Scritti di 
Giuseppe Martini): 73-156. 
——.. “Traslazione dell’Impero e Donazione di Costantino nel pensiero e nella politica 
d'Innocenzo III,” Nuova Rivista Storica 65 (Jan.-Apr., 1981), fasc. I-II (Scritti di Giuseppe 
Martini): 3-72. 
Mazzocco, Angelo. “Decline and Rebirth in Bruni and Biondo.” In Brezzi and Lorch (eds.), 
Umanesimo a Roma nel Quattrocento. Roma: Istituto di Studi Romani, 1984, 249-266. 
Mecacci, Luciano. “Contributo alla bibliografia degli scritti su Eugenio Garin,” I/ Protagora 
38 (2011), 519-526. 
Meersseman, Gilles. “La bibliothéque des Fréres Précheurs de la Minerve a la fin du XVe 
siécle.” In Mélanges Auguste Pelzer. Louvain: Bibliotheque de | Université, Bureaux du 
“Recueil,” 1947, 605-631. 
Meiss, Millard. Painting in Florence and Siena after the Black Death: The Arts, Religion and 
Society in the Mid-Fourteenth Century. London: Harper & Rowe, 1973. 
Mengin, Urbain. Les deux Lippi. Paris: Plon, 1932. 
Michel, O. “Philosophia, philosophos.’ In Theologisches Worterbuch zum Neuen Testament, 
ed. Gerhard Kittel and Gerhard Friedrich, 10 vols. Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer, 1931-1979, 
9:169-185. 
Momigliano, Arnaldo. Jl conflitto tra paganesimo e cristianesimo nel secolo IV: saggi. Tr. 
Anna Davies Morpurgo. Torino: Einaudi, 1968. English edition = The Conflict between 
Paganism and Christianity in the Fourth Century: Essays (Oxford: Clarendon, 1963). 
Monfasani, John. George of Trebisond. A Biography and a Study of his Rhetoric and Logic. 
Leiden: Brill, 1976. 
. “Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite in mid-Quattrocento Rome.” In Supplementum 
Festivum: Studies in Honor of Paul Oskar Kristeller, ed. James Hankins, John Monfasani, 
and Frederick Purnell, Jr. Binghamton: MRTS, 1987, 189-219. Reprinted with the same 
pagination as essay IX in John Monfasani, Language and Learning in Renaissance Italy 
(Aldershot: Ashgate, 1994). 
Mihlenberg, Ekkehard. “Laurentius Valla als Renaissancetheologe,” Zeitschrift fiir Theologie 
und Kirche 66 (1969): 466-480. 
Nauta, Lodi. In Defense of Common Sense: Lorenzo Valla’s Humanist Critique of Scholastic 
Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2009. 
——. “William of Ockham and Lorenzo Valla: False Friends, Semantics, and Ontological 
Reduction,’ Renaissance Quarterly 56 (2003): 613-651. 
Ols, Daniel. “Tommaso d’Aquino.” In Enciclopedia delle Religioni, vol. V. Florence: Vallecchi, 
1973, 1809-25. 
O'Malley, John W. “The Feast of Thomas Aquinas in Renaissance Rome: A Neglected 
Document and its Import,” Rivista di storia della chiesa in Italia 35 (1981): 1-27. 
——. “Some Renaissance Panegyrics of Aquinas,” Renaissance Quarterly 27 (1974): 174-192. 
Orlandi, Stefano. Beato Angelico. Firenze: Olschki, 1964. 
——. “I libri corali di s. Maria Novella con miniature dei sec. XIII e XIV” Memorie 
Domenicane 83 (1966): 55-57. 
—— (ed.). Necrologio di S. Maria Novella. 2 vols. Firenze: Olschki, 1955. 
—— and Isnardo Grossi. Santa Maria Novella e suoi chiostri monumentali. Guida storico- 
artisica. Firenze: Edizioni S. Becocci, 1974. 


[PDF page 347]
BIBLIOGRAPHY 327 
Panofsky, Erwin. Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art. London: Paladin, 1970. 
Penna, Angelo. Principi e caratteri dellesegesi di S. Girolamo. Roma: Pontificio Istituto 
Biblico, 1950. 
Perosa, Alessandro. “Ledizione veneta di Quintiliano coi commenti del Valla, di Pomponio 
Leto e di Sulpizio da Veroli.” In Miscellanea Augusto Campana. 2 vols. Padova: Antenore, 
1981, 575-610. 
Perry, Matt. Marxism and History. New York: Palgrave, 2002. 
Pertusi, Agostino (ed. and tr.). La caduta di Costantinopoli. 2 vols. Verona: Mondadori, 1976. 
Pinborg, Jan. Die Entwicklung der Sprachtheorie im Mittelalter. Miinster: Aschendorff, 1967. 
. “Speculative Grammar.” In The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, ed. 
Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan Pinborg. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1982. 
Pittaluga, Mary. “Filippino Lippi.” In Enciclopedia universale dell arte, 8:623-31. 
Prodi, Paolo. Il sovrano pontefice. Un corpo e due anime: la monarchia papale nella prima eta 
moderna. Bolonga: Il Mulino, 1982. English translation = The Papal Prince: One Body and 
Two Souls. The Papal Monarchy in Early Modern Europe, tr. Susan Haskins (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1987). 
Rabil, Albert. Erasmus and the New Testament: the Mind of a Christian Humanist. San 
Antonio: Trinity University Press, 1972. 
Rand, Edward Kennard. Cicero in the Courtroom of St. Thomas. Milwaukee: Marquette 
University Press, 1946. 
Regoliosi, Mariangela (ed.). Lorenzo Valla e l'umanesimo toscano. Firenze: Polistampa, 2009. 
——.. Lorenzo Valla: La riforma della lingua e della logica. 2 vols. Firenze: Polistampa, 2010. 
——. Pubblicare il Valla. Firenze: Polistampa, 2008. 
——.. “Salvatore Camporeale’s Contribution to Theology and the History of the Church,” 
Journal of the History of Ideas 66 (2005): 527-39. 
Renouard, Ph. Bibliographie des impressions et des oeuvres de J. Badius Ascensius imprimeur 
et humaniste: 1462-1535. 3 vols. Paris: E. Paul et fils et Guillemin, 1908. 
Rice, Eugene. Saint Jerome in the Renaissance. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
1985. 
Rico, Francisco. Nebrija frente a los barbaros. El canon de gramaticos nefastos en la polémica 
del humanismo. Salamanca: Universidad, 1978. 
Rosier, Iréne. La grammaire spéculative des Modistes. Lille: Presse universitaires de Lille, 
1983. 
Rubini, Rocco. “Humanism as Philosophia (Perennis): Grassi’s Platonic rhetoric between 
Gadamer and Kristeller,’ Philosophy and Rhetoric 42 (2009), 242-78. 
——.. “The Last Italian Philosopher: Eugenio Garin (with an Appendix of Documents),” 
Intellectual History Review 21 (2011), 209-230. 
——.. Philology as Philosophy: the Sources of Emesto Grassi’s Postmodern Humanism,” In 
Humanisms, Posthumanisms, and Neohumanisms, a special issue of Annali ditalianistica 
26 (2008), 223-48. 
Sadous, Alfred L. de. Sancti Augustini de doctrina Christiana libri exponuntur, seu de rhe- 
torica apud Christianos disquisitio. Paris: apud Joubert Bibliopolam, 1847. 
Scharf, Alfred. Filippino Lippi. Vienna: A. Schroll, 1935. 
Schiavone, Michele. “Intorno all’Encomion Thomae Aquinatis di Lorenzo Valla,” Rivista di 
filosofia neo-scolastica 47 (1955): 73-79- 
Schlier, Heinrich. J/ tempo della Chiesa. Saggi esegetici. Bologna: Il Mulino, 1968. 
Schlosser, Julius von. “Giusto’s Fresken in Padua und die Vorlaufer der Stanza della 
Segnatura,” Jahrbuch der Kunsthistorischen Sammlungen des Allerhéchsten Kaiserhauses 
17 (1896): 13-100. 
Schmidt, Herman A.P. Introductio in Liturgiam Occidentalem. Roma: Herder, 1960. 
Schramm, Percy Ernst. Herrschaftszeichen und Staatssymbolik. 3 vols. Stuttgart: Hiersemann, 
1954-1956. 
Seigel, Jerrold E. Rhetoric and Philosophy in Renaissance Humanism. The Union of Eloquence 
and Wisdom, Petrarch to Valla. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968. 


[PDF page 348]
328 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Setz, Wolfram. Lorenzo Vallas Schrift gegen di Konstantinische Schenkung, De falsa credita 
et ementita Constantini donatione: Zur Interpretation und Wirkungsgeschichte. 
Tiibingen: M. Niemeyer, 1975. Bibliothek des Deutschen Historischen Instituts in 
Rom, 44. 
Soboul, Albert. A Short History of the French Revolution, 1789-1799. Tr. Geoffrey Symcox. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977. 
Stephens, Walter (ed.). Studia Humanitatis: Studies in Honor of Salvatore Camporeale. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004. Supplement to Modern Language 
Notes 119 (2004). 
Stieber, Joachim W. Pope Eugenius IV, the Council of Basel, and the Secular and Ecclesiastical 
Authorities in the Empire. The Conflict over Supreme Authority and Power in the Church. 
Leiden: Brill, 1978. 
Storoni Mazzolani, Lidia. Sant‘Agostino e i pagani. Palermo: Sellerio, 1987. 
Struever, Nancy. “Fables of Power,” Representations 4 (1983): 108-127. 
——. “Historical Priorities,’ Journal of the History of Ideas 66 (2005): 541-56. 
Sutcliffe, E.F. “Jerome.” In The Cambridge History of the Bible. Vol. Il, ed. G.W.H. Lampe 
(1969), 80-101. 
Taurisano, Innocenzo. Beato Angelico. Roma: Fratelli Palombi, 1955. 
——.. Discepoli e biografi di 8. Tommaso. Note storico-critiche. Roma: Societa Tipografica 
A. Manuzio, 1924. 
——.. Hierarchia Ordinis Praedicatorum. Roma: Manuzio, 1916. 
Telle, Emile V. Erasme de Rotterdam et le Septiéme Sacrament. Genéve: Droz, 1954. 
. LErasmianus sive Ciceronianus d’Etienne Dolet (1535). Geneve: Droz, 1974. 
Toussaint, Stéphane. Humanismes / Antihumanismes: De Ficin a Heidegger. Paris: Belles 
Lettres, 2008. 
Tracy, James D. “The 1489 and 1494 versions of Erasmus’ Antibarbarorum Liber, 
Humanistica Lovaniensia 20 (1971): 81-120. 
Trimpi, Wesley. “The Quality of Fiction: the Rhetorical Transmission of Literary Theory,’ 
Traditio 30 (1974): 1-18. 
Trinkaus, Charles. In Our Image and Likeness. Humanity and Divinity in Italian Humanist 
Thought. 2 vols. London: Constable, 1970. 
——. The Scope of Renaissance Humanism. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1983. 
Ullmann, Walter. Jl papato nel medioevo. Bari: Laterza, 1975. English edition = A Short 
History of the Papacy in the Middle Ages. London: Methuen, 1972. 
Verde, Armando F. Lo Studio Fiorentino 1473-1503. Ricerche e documenti. 6 vols. in 9. Firenze: 
Istituto nazionale di studi sul Rinascimento, 1973. 
Vernant, Jean-Pierre and Pierre Vidal-Naquet. Mito e tragedia nell‘antica Grecia. Torino: 
Einaudi, 1976. Original French edition = Mythe e tragédie en Gréce ancienne (Paris: 
F, Maspero, 1972). English translation = Tragedy and Myth in Ancient Greece, tr. Janet 
Lloyd (Sussex: Harvester Press, 1981). 
Vickers, Brian. “Valla’s Ambivalent Praise of Pleasure: Rhetoric in the Service of Christianity,” 
Viator 17 (1986): 271-319. 
Villoslada, Ricardo G. La Universidad de Paris durante los estudios de Francisco de Vitorio. 
Roma: Aedes Universitatis Gregorianae, 1938. 
Walker, D.P. “Musical Humanism in the 16th and early 17th centuries,” Music Review 2 (1941): 
1-13, 11-121, 220-227, 228-308; 3 (1942): 55-71. 
Walser, Ernst. Poggius Florentinus. Leben und Werke. Leipzig: Teubner, 1914. 
Walz, Angelus. J domenicani al Concilio di Trento. Roma: Herder, 1961. 
——.. “Ordinationes Capitulorum Generalium de Sancto Thoma eiusque cultu et doctrina,” 
Analecta Sacri Ordinis Praedicatorum 31 (1923): 168-173. 
——.. Saint Thomas d’Aquin. Ed. Paul Novarina. Louvain: Publications universitaires, 1962. 
Waswo, Richard. Language and Meaning in the Renaissance. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1987. 
Weise, Georg. Lideale eroico del Rinascimento e le sue premesse umanistiche. Napoli: 
Edizioni scientifiche italiane, 1961. 


[PDF page 349]
BIBLIOGRAPHY 329 
Winternitz, Emanuel. “On Angel Concerts in the 15th Century: A Critical Approach to 
Realism and Symbolism in Sacred Painting.” In idem, Musical Instruments and their 
Symbolism in Western Art. New York: W. W. Norton, 1967, 137-149. 
——.. “Secular musical practice in sacred art,” Early Music 3 (1975): 221-226. 
Zeri, Federico. Pittura e Controriforma. Alle origini dell’ “arte senza tempo.’ Torino: Einaudi, 
1957. Zippel, Gianni. “L’autodifesa di Lorenzo Valla per il processo dell’Inquisizione napoletana 
(1444),” Italia medievale e umanistica 13 (1970): 59-94. 
-“La Defensio quaestionum in philosophia diL. Vallae un noto processo dell’Inquisizione 
napoletana,” Bullettino dell'Istituto Storico Italiano per il Medio Evo e Archivio Muratoriano 
69 (1957): 319-347. 
Zucchi, A. “Il Collegio di S. Tommaso d’Aquino alla Minerva.” Unpublished manuscript. 
Rome, Santa Maria sopra Minerva, Archivio del Convento. 


[PDF page 350]
a 
: 1 
: , 
. 
. =e 
| 
_ ay 
a 
: = 2 
= 
i 
bet 
a 
" 
7 ¥ 
a 
_ 7 = 
te dindies Sty cents de © pre tenpe. ie a ao humeeam Gt Ope rye fae ar rows m 
oy) 
incre iret dow Gyan tm frei Mebspabi. ges - 
ce thao ; 7 
2 
debe ager does, Nalerersbentiits aegte tet ore car ribet: tainty 
Hatbohe elma ied Mantes reise at lpia’ baer mdted rveddenlated 
’ “= view WL heaepenpnanty: fetter 2 water eel A Siesteed ike, i ia 
me og Peon dergh) pe vind ‘rig Dorrace nl oti tesa saliva mons 
"Seah Waite Wl Wy Neat. Sohne edhe ee 
” fateh sivas Ry 0 Care Pee. oe 
raohongms ‘inn top 01 ie arse ficegm! | 0S — the ma te em ~ 
Relpinete itt Feqeiee Sa geqene: {breed sy eee co a 
wa Peeoped Potion wrqrdan tee y allay Cid eit caunkuy eu es eny: ree emi 
“atin muutaretay veto ate ree Oe ee ee 
beta 2 tee Cangas As Comictecty Neapwornd Author ily Dna aewars renee 
i shlasinieeidaaaiis —_ “mventia alls anhypAb ceacrneT 2 ib asic) 1 A tbe 
tae Use aids AAs as gneaniidey Rabe ohege megith nu emee 3 
aac, Kew 9 “Ve! ‘? * Eryecmmnrediens @ 1) 97 rota. 
rc annie Paatin wane Gee Marry ier pte mt a 
im, £7 tH —— i > Sena ae mows yf the Made a» mii 
7 hee. ee ev, — ier: 
- 
= (evgnd + wyis A =e - baton ee aetna, Hemera, Sectetly Tipe 
» ar — 
er! ae eo en 
29 Fe 6 Beem: oe A pewint of & Age ie Greet, Ganbee De, a 
ow . }lesevtiegue oes leseteoend fae dresden dp fou Them, ota, 
Peay, Ate Nemes ( DSi fh he 9 eho smey, Tell 
ion on — oon haar os i | oo ~@) a@y wate ~@ leer Aq a 
a pele) fo-0 : 
— ul “Tel Gatiy © Act e Ue Cacia! Pores Laer 
ow wy ; 
‘Paden Cogan 4 he bree oot Liew hemnalty aed aa = et 
: Rey arsonys Uva as “Gage tet ears 
oa oT) ¢ M2664 Bem“ Jad: Artem Unsbowreiny ook by 
Tim © Se & pet =! cones Feb Lettie igyy Engh Howe ey ~ Vanes, fee Poses fae “See tow, Leto ery SUM, Mp7av 7 Code rammed ftp snails Reienttteetayy sive Ihcertiroviecamanat ene Fh “1 botine> thant rat ot Chae _— Comme. jam hore ant Tere 1 lal Geget: # reese NAT InTRe Gren anion Cea, o% vege feet alee. © fieagedlic om a + wlan 4 ‘@ © Gre) Engh tmmnadion- Papety ma Myth ty Aare at Greet te 
VYouer eis “Lien as ete Tinka ot Mwmue Phetevictns ihe 5 sane a 
Cot ga? my | Creer O ta “onen, te Mea serante tae sepactivn the Bee VN 
a SOs gmap ww, Pe 
ne, nl eyes oe ee me crud Whntan Lae Truvo _—- Vile: ignite [o--wery d weed Reva liesiet wee he ~ MEAenar emane ©. athe tore Cantera san Sore Yoon tng eit da ite Nevalig oy it ee Pmaeatomeen BLED roan 
=~ Sal? Tam th gre hk oa Maen. Laer: PARNER te ete News, Mehwd Seepage Et Semen aia se Meteor 
Un joerraity Viren igh, : . 
Yensoe Seri: Lice anton et Me seninsane civans ~ rAlinteoesh wcensdficdon alten agi 7 “te 


[PDF page 351]
INDEX 
Aaron 79, 264, 267 
Abelard, Peter 206 
Abraham 84 
Accius, Lucius 268 
Achilles 101-102 
Accursius 108 
Actus beati Silvestri presulis 94, 98 
Adorno, Francesco 297 
Ahasuerus 48 
Albert the Great 10, 149n5, 197, 281, 313 
Alberti, Leon Battista 131, 267n 
Alexander of Hales 197, 313 
Alexander the Great 45 
Alfonso of Aragon 3, 7, 24, 71, 135, 140-142, 
238, 240 
Alighieri, Dante 169 
Ambrose, bishop of Milan 9-11, 183, 
198-200, 218, 275, 309, 313, 315 
Ananias 34, 37 
Angelico, Fra 169, 202 
Anselm of Canterbury 197, 209, 313 
Antoninus 284 
Antoninus Pius 284n203 
Antonio da Rho 236-237, 239-240, 246 
Apollinaris 88 
Aquinas, Thomas, see Thomas Aquinas 
Aratus 215 
Arian 146,159 
Aristophanes 1gon 
Aristotle 7, 10, 12, 149, 165-166, 
190N, 191, 193-194, 208-209, 229, 231, 
250, 270 
Arnold of Brescia 65 
Auerbach, Erich 179 
Augustine of Hippo 9—n, 94, 101, 179, 183, 
198-200, 219N, 221, 223-225, 275, 294, 
307, 309, 313, 315 City of God 73, 11-113, 115, 19-120, 
123-125, 127-128, 131-132 
De doctrina christiana 206, 213, 216-220, 
223, 225, 228, 292 
De Trinitate 213, 216, 222 
Augustus 39, 108, 284 
Aureolus, Petrus 231 
Aurispa, Giovanni 27, 139, 272-274 
Averroes 146, 159, 180 
Aymo 99 Aymo, Nicola de 99 
Bade, Josse 287n 
Balbi of Genoa 99 
Basel, Council of 140 
Basil of Caesarea (the Great) 10-11, 185, 
199-200, 275, 309, 315 Baxandall, Michael 263 
Beccadelli, Antonio 17, 242 
Becket, Thomas 169, 303 
Bede 197, 313 
Bel 88 
Bernard of Clairvaux 10, 197, 210, 313 
Bertelli, Carlo 162 
Berthier, J.J. 158n, 161-162 
Bible, books of 
Acts 34, 138, 142, 215 
Apocalypse 199 
Colossians 185-186, 234, 252, 311 
1 Corinthians 213-215 
2 Corinthians 307 
Daniel 87-89 
Deuteronomy 116, 215, 221 
Ecclesiasticus 153 
Ephesians 30, 41, 301 
Exodus 217, 221 
Galatians 33-34, 16 
Genesis 123 
Isaiah 214 
Jeremiah 34 
John 8o, 89, 92, 98, 117n164, 138, 142, 301 
Judith 89 
1 Kings 117 
Leviticus 116 
Luke 92 
Mark 92 
Matthew 40-41, 43, 51, 80, 91-92 
1 Timothy 40 
Titus 215 
Tobias 89 
Wisdom of Solomon 159 
Biondo, Flavio, see Flavio, Biondo 
Boethius 55, 159, 192-193, 197, 203-210, 231, 
234-236, 240, 245-253, 281, 313 
Consolation of Philosophy 203-205, 234, 
246, 253n 
De institutione musica 200, 201n 
see also Thomas Aquinas, Commentary 
on Boethius’s De Trinitate 
Boethius of Dacia 9n24 


[PDF page 352]
332 INDEX 
Bologna, University of 5 
Bonaventure 197, 214, 313 
Boniface VIII, Pope 21, 51, 59, 107 
Bracciolini, Poggio 17-18, 25, 148-149, 
167n24, 176, 234, 242-243, 277, 289-290 
Breviarium Romanum 167 
Bruni, Leonardo 17-18, 25 
Brutus, Lucius Junius 40 
Bonaiuto, Andrea di 157-158, 160, 169 
Caesar, Gaius Julius 20, 39, 49, 126, 283n 
Cajetan, Thomas (Tommaso de Vio) 149, 
151-154, 156, 158n 
Caligula 39 
Callixtus III, Pope 177, 238 
Camporeale, Salvatore I. 1-2, 1-15 
Cantimori, Delio 133 
Cappella Carafa (Rome) 156-158, 
161-163 
Cappellone degli Spagnoli 
(Florence) 156-158, 160-162 
Capreolo, Giovanni 149, 151-152, 154, 156 
Carafa, Oliviero 158 
Cartei, Stefano 297 
Cassian, John 197, 333 
Cato the Elder 187 
Cato the Younger 299 
Charlemagne 102 
Chiostro Verde (Florence), see Cappellone 
degli Spagnoli 
Cicero 85n129, 121, 173, 178-180, 187, 
189n64, 191n64, 247, 250, 256, 259-260, 
268-269, 278 
Claudius 39 
Clement of Alexandria 215 
Cochlaeus, Johann 132-133 
Codex, see Corpus Juris Civilis 
Codex Theodosianus 67, 69,14 
see also Theodosius 
Columella, Lucius Junius 
Moderatus 200n83 
Concordantia discordantium canonum, see 
Gratian 
Condulmer, Gabriele, see Eugenius IV 
Constance, Council of 157n 
Constantine (the Great) 4, 6, 17-143 
(passim) 
Constantinople, Council of, Fourth 78 
Constitutum Constantini 4-6, 13, 17-143 
(passim), 273 
Corpus Juris Civilis 
Codex 71 
Digest 53,117 
Cosmas Indicopleustes 184 
Courcelle, Pierre Paul 253n 
Croce, Benedetto 12 
Cyprian, bishop of Carthage 9, 183, 197, 
215, 218, 309, 313 
Cyrus the Great 48 
Damian, Peter 207-210, 215, 231 
Daniel 87 
David 117 
Decretum, see Gratian 
Demosthenes 165, 190n, 195 
De Panizza Lorch, Maristella 238-240, 
244, 248, 251, 253n 
Digest, see Corpus Juris Civilis 
Di Napoli, Giovanni 145 
ps.-Dionysius the Areopagite 10—u, 167, 
199-200, 233, 315 
Dominic (de Guzman) 171-172, 197, 305, 
307, 313 
Donation of Constantine, see Constitutum 
Constantini 
Dorp, Martin 183 
Eberhard of Béthune 99 
Ecclesiastical History, see Eusebius of 
Caesarea 
Ecole Normale Supérieure (Paris) 1 
Edict of Milan 67, 69 
Eighth Synod, see Constantinople, Council 
of, Fourth 
Ennius 108 
Epimenides 215 
Erasmus of Rotterdam 36n47, 133, 164, 
182-183, 257, 287n, 291-296 
Estouteville, Guillaume d’ 177 
Eugenius IV, Pope 7, 21, 24-26, 28, 70-71, 
105, 135, 138-140, 148, 242 
Eupolis 190n 
Euripides 268-270 
Eusebius (author of the Legenda 
Silvestri) 85, 97 
Eusebius of Caesarea 60, 64, 67, 69, 87-88, 
15, 131 
Fabro, Cornelio 149 
Facio, Bartolomeo 242-243 
Federici, Carlo dei 148 
Ferguson, Wallace K. 293 
Flavio, Biondo 25, 125 
Florence, Council of 146, 285 
Florence, University of u 
Fois, Mario 254 
Frederick Barbarossa 65 
Fried, Johannes 4n8 


[PDF page 353]
INDEX 333 
Gaddi, Taddeo 158n 
Gaetano, see Cajetan 
Gaius, see Caligula 
Galba 39 
Gamaliel the Elder 138, 142 
Garin, Eugenio n-12 
Gaspare da Verona 177 
Gelasius I, Pope 51, 59, 63-64, 94, 98 
Gellius, Aulus igon, 283n 
Gentile, Giovanni 12 
George, Saint 89 
Gesta Sanctorum, see Jacopo da Voragine 
Gesta Silvestri 63-64, 97 
Giles of Rome 197, 313 
Giovanni da Fiesole, 
see Angelico 
Giovanni da Mantova 254 
Giovanni di Napoli, Fra 145 
Girolami, Remigio de’ 147 
Golden Legend, see Jacopo da Voragine 
Grabmann, Martin 150 
Gramsci, Antonio 14 
Gratian 5,10, 60-63, 69, 78, 102, 119-120, 
197, 313 Gregory I (the Great), Pope 10-11, 53, 61, 
198-200, 275, 315 
Gregory Nazianzen 10-11, 185-186, 
199-200, 215, 309, 315 
Guarino Veronese 18 
Guglielmo da Tocco 172 
Guidi di Nepozzano, Uberto 147,174n 
Heer, Friedrich 133 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm 
Friedrich 14 
Hermagoras 180 
Hilary of Poitiers 9, 183, 197, 215, 218, 275, 
309, 313 Huguccio of Pisa 99 
Hus, Jan 75 
Hutten, Ulrich von 131-132 
Ibn Rushd, see Averroes 
Innocent III, Pope 21, 102 
Isaac, Jean 208-209 
Isaiah (prophet). 214 
Isidore of Seville 99, 108, 197, 200, 313 
Isocrates 165, 166n, 186, 258 
Istituto Nazionale di Studi sul 
Rinascimento (Florence) u 
Jacopo da Voragine 63-64, 89, 93, 
95, 169 
Jeremiah (prophet) 34 
Jerome 9—un, 46, 94, 183, 198-200, 216, 219n, 
221, 225, 235, 252, 271-275, 288, 291-296, 
309; 313, 315 
Commentary on Daniel 87 
Contra Rufinum 273-274 
Letter to Ctesiphon (ep. 133) 251-253 
Letter to Eustochium (ep. 22) 212-214, 
255-262, 272-274 
Letter to Pammachius, De optimo genere 
interpretandi (ep. 57) 287 
Letter to Pammachius (ep. 66) 212-216, 
219n 
Letter to the Orator Magnus (ep. 
70) 212-215, 218, 257, 263, 
273-274, 292 
Jesus Christ 40-41, 50-51, 78-80, 87, 92, 
117164, 142, 162, 172, 218 
Johannes de Sacrobosco 184 
John Chrysostom 10-11, 185, 199-200, 275, 
309, 315 John Damascene 10-11, 199-202, 315 
John Duns Scotus 197, 313 
John of Holywood, see Johannes de 
Sacrobosco 
John the Baptist 303 
John the Evangelist 172, 305 
Johns Hopkins University 1 
John XXII, Pope 145 
Judas Iscariot 50 
Judith 89 
Juvenal 85 
Kristeller, Paul Oskar 145, 150 
Lactantius, Lucius Caecilius Firmianus 9, 
76-77, 131, 136, 183, 189N64, 197, 215, 218, 
275, 309, 313 Landriani, Gerardo 37, 134-138 
Lateran Palace 60-61 
Leclercq, Jean 254 
Leeman, A. D. 193 
Legenda aurea, see Jacopo da Voragine 
Legenda sanctorum, see Jacopo da Voragine 
Legenda Silvestri 47, 60, 62-65, 68-69, 73, 
76, 84-101, 110, 114-115 
Ligorio, Pirro 161 
Lippi, Filippino 157, 161, 163 
Livy 90, 91, 99 
Lorch, Maristella, see De Panizza Lorch 
Louis the Pious 69, 101-104 
Lucian of Samosata 136 
Lucretia 40 
Luther, Martin 14-15, 131-134, 163 
Lysias 179 


[PDF page 354]
oo4 
Macrobius 36n47,190n 
Malchus 117 
Mamertinus, Claudius 166n 
Marcus Aurelius 284n203 
Mariani, Valerio 161 
Marrou, Henri-Irénée 179, 216 
Marsuppini, Carlo 17-18, 148 
Martin of Dacia 9n24 
Mary (mother of Jesus) 92,172, 299 
Medici, Cosimo de’ (il Vecchio) 283 
Melchiades, Pope 60, 69 
Melchizedek 84 
Menander 215 
More, Thomas 36n47 
Moses 78 
Mussato, Albertino 254 
Naaman 98 
National Institute for the Study of the 
Renaissance, see Istituto Nazionale di 
Studi sul Rinascimento 
Nazarius 166n 
Nebuchadnezzar 48 
Nero 39 
Nestorius 159 
Niccoli, Niccolo 148-149 
Nicea, Council of 67 
Nicholas V, Pope 3, 176-177, 202, 238, 
240-241, 264, 281, 283-286 
Octavian, see Augustus 
Odo of Chateauroux 210, 229 
Origen 88, 215, 223 
Orlandi, Stefano 159 
Otho 39 
Otto of Freising 5 
Pacatus Drepanius, Latinus 166n 
Pactum Hludovicianum 57, 60, 69, 101-12, 
132 
Pacuvius, Marcus 264, 268-270 
Pagina Privilegii 21, 62 
Panofsky, Erwin 131, 263 
Panormita, see Beccadelli, Antonio 
Parentucelli, Tommaso, see Nicholas V 
Paris, University of 228 
Paschal I, Pope 69-70, 102-103 
Passeri, Giuseppe 158n 
Patroclus 101-102 
Paucupalea 62-63 
Paul IV, Pope 16:1, 163 
Paul, Saint 33-35, 37, 40, 81, 83, 93, 06, 137, 
172, 185-186, 192, 194-195, 203, 213-215, 
220N, 224, 232, 234-235, 252-253, 
276-277, 287n, 288, 303, 305, 307, 309, 31 
INDEX 
Peter Lombard 10, 150-152, 154, 159-160, 
197, 313 Peter Martyr, see Peter of Verona 
Peter of Verona 8, 159, 169, 301 
Peter, Saint 26, 33-35, 40, 50, 61, 78, 80, 83, 
98, 117, 172, 307 
Phasur 34 
Philoponus, John 184 
Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni 12 
Pius V, Pope 152,163 
Plato 190n, 257, 259-261 
Plautus 77, 122171, 257, 259 
Pliny the Elder 77 
Pliny the Younger 166 
Poliziano, Angelo 293 
Pollio, Gaius Asinius 36, 179-180 
Priscian 278 
Ptolemy of Lucca 74n103 
Pythagoras 253 
Quintilian 27, 35n45, 58, 85, 86n, 89-90, 
95, 121, 143, 165n, 166, 170, 178-181, 
186-189, 191, 193, 196, 200n83, 210, 221, 
233, 237, 241-243, 249-252, 257-258, 262, 
267-270, 273, 278-279, 283, 285, 290 
see also ps.-Quintilian 
ps.-Quintilian (author of the 
Declamationes) 121, 123 
Radetti, Giorgio 169, 251, 253n 
Remigius of Auxerre 197, 313 
Rhetorica ad Herennium 86n, 178-179 
Romulus 40 
Rufinus 60, 64, 69, 115, 131, 273, 294 
see also Eusebius of Caesarea 
Rule of Saint Augustine 173n43 
Sadous, Alfred L. de 216 
Saint Albert's (college) 1 
Saint-Gilles, Jean de 210, 229 
Saint John Lateran, Archbasilica of 
(Rome), see Lateran Palace 
Saint Paul, Basilica of (Rome) 81-82 
Saint Peter, Basilica of (Rome) 81-82 
Sallust 86n, 299 
Sandei, Felino 17 
Sanhedrin 142 
Santa Maria Novella (Florence) 1, 147-148, 
158, 174n 
see also Cappellone degli Spagnoli 
Santa Maria sopra Minerva (Rome) 7-8, 
150, 155, 163, 174, 176-177, 202 
see also Cappella Carafa 
Santa Reparata (Florence) 148 
Satan 50 


[PDF page 355]
INDEX 
Schlosser, Julius von 157n 
Scrivani, Melchior 3 
Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa 11 
Seigel, Jerrold E. 219 
Sentences, see Peter Lombard 
Serra, Giovanni 33 
Setz, Wolfram 35, 37, 45, 107, 19 
Sigismund (Holy Roman Emperor) 105 
Silvestri, Francesco 147 
Soboul, Albert 14 
Solomon 117, 267 
Spina, Bartolomeo 152-154 
Stephen II, Pope 101 
Steuco, Agostino 133 
Suetonius 108 
Susanna 89 
Sylvester I, Pope 4, 6, 28-29n32, 30, 40, 42, 
44, 49-54, 57, 61, 63, 66, 79-80, 82-85, 
87, 98, 05 
Symmachus (Prefect of Rome) 67 
Tarquinius Superbus 40, 126, 207 
Ten Commandments 66 
Terence 86n 
Tertulian 252 
Theodosian Code, see Codex Theodosianus 
Theodosius 45, 67, 110, 114 
Thomas (apostle) 303 
Thomas Aquinas 7-1, 145-315 (passim) 
Commentary on Boethius’s De 
Trinitate 203, 21-228, 232-233, 
255-257, 274, 286 
Contra impugnantes Dei cultum et 
religionem 219n—220n 
Expositiones 180 
Expositio super librum Boethii de 
Trinitate, see Commentary on 
Boethius’s De Trinitate 
Scriptum in libros Senentiarum 152 
Summa contra gentes 159 
Summa theologiae 149-152, 154, 158n, 
161-163, 175, 180, 182, 211, 226 
Super Epistolas s. Pauli lectura 287n 
Thucydides 42n6o, 190n 
Tiberius 39 
Tobias 89 
Tolosani, Giovanmaria dei 133 
Torquemada, Juan de 202 
Tortelli, Giovanni 176 
Tracy, James 291 
Traini, Francesco 156, 169 
Traversari, Ambrogio 17-19, 134 
Trent, Council of 146, 152, 154, 163 
Trevisan, Ludovico 28, 134-136, 138-140, 142 
Trinkaus, Charles 133 
335 
Tudeschi, Niccol6 dei 140 
Twelve Tables 66 
Ulpian 283n 
Valerius Maximus 91 
Valla, Lorenzo 1—u, passim 
Adnotationes in Novum Testamentum 3, 
22, 82, 92, 99, 155, 162, 176, 193, 195, 198, 
206, 241, 243, 264-266, 279-280, 
285-288 
Annotations on the New Testament, see 
Adnotationes in Novum Testamentum 
Antidota in Pogium 167n24, 176, 242 
Apologia 135, 234, 242 
Collatio Novi Testamenti, see 
Adnotationes in Novum Testamentum 
Comparison of Cicero and Quintilian, see 
De comparatione Ciceronis 
Quintilianique 
De comparatione Ciceronis 
Quintilianique 17-18, 139, 187, 241 
De falso credita et ementita Constantini 
donatione 2, 4—7,17-143 (passim), 
241, 272-273, 289 
De libero arbitrio 3, 54-55, 13, 167, 176, 
203-208, 210, 229-232, 234, 241, 250, 
261, 289 
De professione religiosorum 3, 234, 241 
De vero bono, see De vero 
falsoque bono 
De vero falsoque bono 3, 17-19, 22, 36, 
134, 167, 186, 196, 204-205, 208, 
234-240, 243-253, 261, 285-286, 289 
De voluptate, see De vero falsoque bono 
Dialecticae disputationes 3, 7, 22-23, 27, 
54-56, 75, 95-97, 123, 135) 138, 155, 167, 
170N33, 181, 184n55, 189Nn64, 195, 204, 
208, 235, 237-245, 248, 251-252, 
285-286, 288 
Dialectical Disputations, see Dialecticae 
disputationes 
Donation of Constantine, see De falso 
credita et ementita Constantini 
donatione 
Elegances of the Latin Language, see 
Elegantiae linguae latinae 
Elegantiae linguae latinae 3, 82,176, 181, 
193, 204, 233, 241, 243, 254-257, 
263-265, 270, 272-273, 276-278, 
280-281, 286-288, 291, 293 
Encomion sancti Thomae_ 2, 7-11, 15, 34 
145-297 (passim) 
Encomium of Saint Thomas, see 
Encomion sancti Thomae 


[PDF page 356]
336 
Gesta Ferdinandi regis Aragonum 165n 
In principio sui studi, see Oratio in 
principio sui studii 
Invectivae in Facium 242 
On Free Will, see De libero arbitrio 
On Pleasure, see De vero 
falsoque bono 
On the Profession of the Religious, see De 
professione religiosorum 
Oratio in principio sui studii 155, 193, 264 
Oration on the Falsely Believed and 
Forged Donation of Constantine, see 
De falso credita et ementita 
Constantini donatione 
Pruning of all Dialectic, see Dialecticae 
disputationes 
Quintilian, Insititutio oratoria 
(glosses) 85, 89, 165n, 166, 189n64, 
200n83, 254, 283n 
Repastinatio dialecticae et philosophiae, 
see Dialecticae disputationes 
INDEX 
Thucydides, History (translation) 42, 
155, 193, 280-287 
Varro, Marcus Terentius 91 
Vasari, Giorgio 161 
Vespasian 39 
Villa I Tatti, The Harvard University 
Center for Renaissance Studies 1 
Vio, Tommaso de, see Cajetan 
Virgil 78, 303 
Vitelleschi, Giovanni 117 
Vitellius 39 
Vitruvius 201n 
Weise, Georg 164 
Wezel 65 
William of Conches 9n24 
William of Ockham 232 
Wycliffe, John 75, 157n 
Zeno 253 
Zeri, Federico 164 


[PDF page 357]


[PDF page 358]
ois @& 


[PDF page 359]


[PDF page 360]
The work of Lorenzo Valla (14.06- $7) has enjoyed renewed attention 
in recent years, as have new critical editions of his texts. One of the 
_ most interesting interpreters of Valla, Salvatore I. Camporeale, O.P., 
had a following among scholars who read Italian, but very little of 
his work saw the light in English before his death in 2002. This book 
presents two of Camporeale’s studies on Valla in English, which 
examine in detail two of Valla’s works: his treatise on the Donation 
of Constantine (undoubtedly the work for which Valla is best known) 
and his Encomium of Saint Thomas Aquinas, delivered publicly in the 
last year of Valla’s life and, in Camporeale’ s reading, summing up 
Valla’s multi-faceted thought. 
PATRICK BAKER (FAAR’13), Ph.D. (2009) in History, Harvard 
University, is a Senior Research Associate at Humboldt-Universitat 
zu Berlin. His research interests include Renaissance humanism, 
historiography, and the reception of the classical tradition. 
CHRISTOPHER S. CELENZA (FAAR 94), Charles Homer Haskins 
Professor at Johns Hopkins University and Director of the American 
Academy in Rome (2010-14), has research interests that include 
intellectual history, the history of philosophy, and Neo-Latin 
literature. 
Studies in the History 
of Christian Traditions, 172 
ISSN: 1573-5664 
brill.com/shct 
OS 
