

[PDF page 1]


[PDF page 2]
Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2021 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 
https://archive.org/details/catholicconcorda0000nich 


[PDF page 3]
=< 


[PDF page 4]
vi 
i} 
if 
. 
sont 
t= 
“Sp 
Leen! | Anion 
ma 2. | 
= = 
=. ee ee ee 
ten ae 
aa”? 


[PDF page 5]
CAMBRIDGE TEXTS IN“ HE 
HistORVOR POLITICAL THOUGHT 
NICHOLAS OF CUSA 
The Catholic Concordance 


[PDF page 6]
CAMBRIDGE TEXTS IN THE 
His TORY OP POREICAG LHOUGEET: 
Series editors 
RAYMOND GuESS Columbia University 
QUENTIN SKINNER Christ’s College, Cambridge 
The series is intended to make available for students the most important 
texts required for an understanding of the history of political thought. 
The scholarship of the present generation has greatly expanded our sense 
of the range of authors indispensable for such an understanding, and the 
series will reflect those developments. It will also include a number of less 
well-known works, in particular those needed to establish the intellectual 
contexts that in turn help to make sense of the major texts. The principal 
aim, however, will be to produce new versions of the major texts them- 
selves, based on the most up-to-date scholarship. The preference will 
always be for complete texts, and a special feature of the series will be to 
complement individual texts, within the compass of a single volume, with 
subsidiary contextual material. Each volume will contain an introduction 
on the historical identity and contemporary significance of the work or 
works concerned, as well as a chronology, notes on further reading and 
(where appropriate) brief biographical sketches of significant individuals 
mentioned in each text. 
For a list of titles published in the series, please see end of book. 


[PDF page 7]
WITHDRAWN 
UCR LIBRARY 
NI CHO EAS*@r GWwSi4 
The 
Catholic Concordance 
ED TE DRAIN Dea RSAUN:S ACE Ds BY. 
PAUL EA SIGMUND 
Department of Politics, Princeton University 
h, 
The 
Iniverst 
right of the 
ty of Cambr. idge 
if 
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
CAMBRIDGE 
NEW YORK PORT CHESTER 
MELBOURNE SYDNEY 


[PDF page 8]
Published by the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge 
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge cB2 1RP 
40 West 2oth Street, New York, Ny roor1-4211, USA 
10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia 
© Cambridge University Press 1991 
First published 1991 
Printed in Great Britain by The Bath Press, Avon 
British Library cataloguing in publication data 
Nicholas, Cardinal 1401-1464 
The Catholic concordance. — (Cambridge texts in the 
history of political thought). 
1. Politics — Christian viewpoints 
1. Title u. Sigmund, Paul E. (Paul Eugene) 
261.7 
Library of Congress cataloguing in publication data 
Nicholas, of Cusa, Cardinal, 1401-1464. 
[De concordantia Catholica. English] 
The Catholic concordance / Nicholas of Cusa: edited and 
translated by Paul E. Sigmund. 
p. cm. — (Cambridge texts in the history of political 
thought) 
Translation of: De concordantia Catholica. 
Includes bibliographical references (p. _) and index. 
ISBN 0-5 21-40207—-7 
1. Church and state — Catholic Church — Early works to 1800. 
2. Conciliar theory — Early works to 1800. 3. Catholic Church — 
Government — Early works to 1800. 1. Sigmund, Paul E. un. Title. 
il. Series. 
BX179O.N5C613 1991 
262'.02-dc20  go-22085 CIP 
ISBN 0521 40207 7 hardback 


[PDF page 9]
Contents 
Translator’s preface page vii 
Introduction xi 
Sources xl 
Select bibliography xli 
Chronology xliii 
The Catholic Concordance I 
Book 1 5 
Book 11 49 
Book 11 205 
Index 323 


[PDF page 10]


[PDF page 11]
Translator’s preface 
Some years ago, the late Ewart Lewis observed that it was likely to be 
a long time before the “average professor of political theory will turn 
to his well-underlined copy of Nicholas of Cusa’s De concordantia 
catholica with the same facility with which he turned to Aristotle’s 
Politics.”' This first complete translation of the Concordantia into 
English is an effort to make this major work of political and eccelesio- 
logical theory available to contemporary scholars. Before its publica- 
tion the only English translation was a sometimes inaccurate excerpt 
containing the sections dealing with the theory of consent and 
Nicholas’ proposals for a system of representative councils in the 
medieval empire.” The lack of a definitive Latin text, the length of the 
work, and the considerable linguistic problems arising from Cusanus’ 
awkward style and defective knowledge of Latin’ have long deterred 
scholars from undertaking the formidable task of translation. 
The problem of establishing the Latin text has been resolved, 
thanks to the work of dedicated German scholars. In 1928, Professor 
Gerhard Kallen agreed to prepare a critical Latin edition under the 
auspices of the Heidelberg Academy of Sciences. Books 1 and 11 were 
published in 1939 but the publication of Book m was delayed by 
"Ewart Lewis, Medieval Political Ideas, vol. 1, New York, 1954, p. vii. 
Francis W. Coker, Readings in Political Philosophy, 2nd edn, New York, 1938, pp. 257- 
76. An Italian translation has been published by Pio Gaia in Nicolo Cusano, Opere 
religiose, Turin, 1971, pp. 115-546, and a French translation by Roland Galibois, 
Nicolas de Cues, Concordance catholique, Sherbrooke, Canada, 1977. A German version 
is being prepared by Hans Gerhard Senger of the University of Cologne. 
3 Nicholas himself refers to his “uncultivated style” in the Preface to the Concordantia (no. 
2). 
Vii 


[PDF page 12]
Translator’s preface 
World War II and it only appeared in 1959. In 1964 and 1965 Books 1 
and i were reissued with a critical apparatus that incorporated more 
recent scholarship, and in 1968, on Gerhard Kallen’s eighty-fourth 
birthday, a complete set of indices to the entire work was published. 
In my translation I have occasionally (only rarely) departed from 
Kallen’s interpretation, and corrected the very few mistakes that 
appeared in his text and footnotes. The references to Latin printed 
sources in the footnotes are taken from the Heidelberg edition, but I 
have added references to English translations where appropriate and 
noted the more important recent scholarly works that may help in 
understanding the text. In the interest of space I have included only 
those references that are directly relevant, and I have retained 
Nicholas’ form of citing the canon and Roman law and added the 
modern equivalents in parentheses in the text itself. Migne’s 
Patrologia has been used as the principal reference for the early Latin 
and Greek texts and Mansi’s Sacrorum conciliorum ... collectio is 
referred to when the church councils are quoted, because they are the 
most generally available source collections. My translations of biblical 
quotations are influenced by both the Douai and King James versions 
in English but mainly by the Latin (Vulgate) text. 
Both the introduction and the footnotes indicate my indebtedness 
to the host of German scholars who have contributed to a veritable 
explosion of Cusanus scholarship during the last twenty-five years. In 
addition to my obvious dependence on Gerhard Kallen’s erudition, I 
should mention the excellent work being done by Rudolf Haubst and 
those associated with the Institut ftir Cusanus-Forschung, formerly 
located at the Johannes-Gutenberg Universitat in Mainz and since 
1981 at the University of Trier. All students of Cusanus are grateful 
to Erich Meuthen of the University of Cologne for his continuing 
contributions to a fuller knowledge of Cusanus’ life and writings. The 
preparation of the translations was substantially assisted by grants 
from the Princeton University Committee for Research in the Social 
Sciences and the Humanities, and by a Senior Fellowship from the 
National Endowment for the Humanities. The final version of the text 
was prepared at the Rockefeller Foundation’s Bellagio Study Center. 
The Introduction will refer to my earlier work on Cusanus, in 
particular to Nicholas of Cusa and Medieval Political Thought (Cam- 
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1963). It will also reveal the 
striking relevance of Cusanus’ thought to the currents that have 
Vili 


[PDF page 13]
Translator’s preface 
shaken church and state during the twenty-five years in which this 
translation has been in preparation. A reading of the original text with 
its heavy burden of references to canon law and theology, and its 
considerable emphasis on tradition and authority, should correct the 
mistaken impression, fostered by modern commentators* that 
Nicholas of Cusa was a precursor of modern liberal democracy. It will 
also reveal, however, that the later movements for expanded political 
participation and restraint on the arbitrary exercise of power have very 
deep roots in Western history and religion.” The checkered history of 
subsequent efforts to “constitutionalize” church and _ state has 
demonstrated how difficult it is to reconcile authority and freedom in 
matters political or religious. The conciliar movement was one of the 
first efforts to come to terms with this problem, and Nicholas of Cusa 
was the conciliarist who perceived most clearly its broader theoretical 
implications for both politics and religion. 
This book is dedicated to my three children, Paul, David, and 
Stephen, whose appearance and development during the years in 
which I worked on it provided a constant reminder that the faith of 
the celibate Nicholas of Cusa in an underlying order in the universe 
runs contrary to the experience of every parent. 
*See John Neville Figgis, From Gerson to Grotius, London, 1916, p. 69; Otto von Gierke, 
Political Theories of the Middle Age, Cambridge, 1900, p. 56; Paolo Rotta, Nicole Cusano, 
Milan, 1942, p. 27; Andreas Posch, Die Concordantia des Nikolaus von Cues, Paderborn, 
1930, P. 94. 
> Among the studies in English that have emphasized the importance of the political 
thought associated with the medieval church for the development of Western consti- 
tutionalism are Karl Morrison, Tradition and Authority in the Western Church, 300-1140, 
Princeton, N.J., 1969; Antony Black, Monarchy and Community: Political Ideas in the Later 
Conciliar Controversy, 1430-1450, Cambridge, 1970, and Council and Commune: The 
Conciliar Movement and the Fifteenth Century Heritage, London, 1979; and Brian Tierney, 
Religion, Law, and the Growth of Constitutional Thought, 11530-1650, Cambridge, 1982. 
ix 


[PDF page 14]
= 


[PDF page 15]
Introduction 
Nicholas of Cusa, in Latin Nicolaus Cusanus, was born in 1401 at 
Kues on the banks of the Moselle river between Trier and Koblenz. 
His father was a moderately well-to-do boatman and vineyard owner 
who served on juries and lent money to the local nobility.' There is no 
proof that Nicholas studied with the Brothers of the Common Life in 
Deventer, Holland, as many of his earlier biographers assert, 
although he was influenced by the devotio moderna that they represen- 
ted, and a scholarship, the Bursa Cusana, named after him, was 
established in the seventeenth century at Deventer. Following a year’s 
stay at the University of Heidelberg in 1416, he pursued higher 
education in canon law at the University of Padua from 1417 until 
1423. After receiving a doctorate in canon law (doctor decretorum) he 
returned to Germany and enrolled at the University of Cologne in 
early 1425. He seems to have studied philosophy and theology at 
Cologne and he practiced and probably also taught canon law. (In 
1428 he turned down an offer of a professorship in canon law at the 
University of Louvain.) In 1427 and 1429-30, Cusanus travelled to 
Rome as the secretary of the Archbishop of Trier and established 
contacts with the Italian humanists who were interested in his reports 
'Biographical details have been taken from Edmond Vansteenberghe, Le Cardinal 
Nicholas de Cues, Paris, 1920; Erich Meuthen, Nikolaus von Kues 1401-1464, 6th edn, 
Miinster, 1982; and the collection of original sources on Cusanus’ life, edited by Erich 
Meuthen and Hermann Hallauer, Acta Cusana, vol. 1 (1401-1437), Hamburg, 1976. I 
have also drawn on personal conversations with Professor Meuthen of the University of 
Cologne and with present and former associates of the Cusanus Institut, now located in 
Trier, especially Rudolf Haubst, and I have consulted Nicholas of Cusa’s library in 
Kues, one of the oldest private foundations in Europe (established by his will in 1464). 


[PDF page 16]
Introduction 
of having discovered lost classical manuscripts in German monastic 
and cathedral libraries. In December 1429, he brought to Rome an 
eleventh-century manuscript of the comedies of Plautus that is still 
preserved in the Vatican library. 
In 1430, Ulrich von Manderscheid, a member of the local nobility 
in the Moselle valley, made Nicholas his chancellor. Ulrich had been 
dean of the cathedral chapter in Cologne, and after the death of the 
Archbishop of Trier in 1430, he attempted to secure election to that 
post. (In addition to his spiritual functions, the Archbishop of Trier 
exercised temporal power over considerable territory in the Rhine and 
Moselle valleys, and was one of the seven electors of the Holy Roman 
Empire.) The first vote of the cathedral chapter went to another 
candidate but after the dispute was appealed to Rome and the pope 
named another candidate, Ulrich succeeded in persuading the chap- 
ter to vote for him. The dispute was then appealed to the Council of 
Basel which had begun to meet in July 1431. In February 1432, 
Nicholas of Cusa was formally incorporated into the council as a 
member of the delegation representing the claim of Ulrich to the 
Trier archbishopric. 
Since its opening, the council had been embroiled in disputes with 
the pope. The Council of Constance (1414-1418) had voted in its 
decree Haec sancta (April 6, 1415) that it held its power “directly from 
Christ [and] every man, whatever his estate or office, including the 
pope, is obliged to obey it in matters concerned with the faith, the 
extirpation of schism, and reform of the church in head and members 
...” It also stated that it could not be dissolved until the necessary 
reforms had been carried out. On October 9, 1417, the council had 
adopted the decree, Frequens, which called for a new council in five 
years, another seven years later, and councils every ten years there- 
after. The council had met at Constance in order to end the schism 
created by the existence of three rival claimants to the papal throne. 
After persuading the Roman pope to resign and deposing the other 
two, it had elected a new pope who took the name of Martin V. 
Following his election, Martin swore to observe ‘whatever has been 
defined, concluded, and decreed in a conciliar fashion [conciliariter] in 
matters of faith by the present council.” Whether that oath included 
the doctrine of conciliar supremacy contained in Haec sancta is a 
matter of dispute to this day (centering principally around the signifi- 
xl 


[PDF page 17]
Introduction 
cance of the word conciliariter in relation to the assertion of conciliar 
supremacy)’ but in observance of Frequens Pope Martin called a 
council which met at Pavia and Siena in 1423-24. After an incon- 
clusive discussion of possible reform decrees the meager represen- 
tation (two cardinals, twenty-five bishops) in attendance at Siena 
voted to hold another council at Basel in 1431. 
The papal legates had acted as chairmen at the Council of Siena 
and the pope had given them power to transfer or dissolve the council 
if they saw fit. As the date for the meeting at Basel approached, the 
Basel Council was seen as a possible site for discussions with the 
representatives of the Greek Church who were interested in negotiat- 
ing a reunion with the West, and also as an occasion to deal with the 
Hussite heresy in Bohemia (modern Czechoslovakia) which had con- 
tinued to spread even after Jan Hus had been burned at the stake at 
Constance. Before he died in early 1431, Pope Martin appointed 
Cardinal Giuliano Cesarini to preside over the council, and gave him 
the same power to dissolve or transfer it that had been given to the 
papal legates at Siena. Soon after the Basel assembly opened, Pope 
Martin’s successor, Eugene IV, decided that it should be transferred 
to a site in Italy, both so that he could be in attendance, and because 
the Greeks had indicated their preference for an Italian city. In late 
1431 he attempted to dissolve the council and to call a new one at 
Bologna, but by the time the papal bull of dissolution arrived in Basel 
(it took as long as two months for messages to travel between Rome 
and Basel) it had already organized itself and renewed the Frequens 
decree of Constance. At its second session in February 1432, the 
council reissued Haec sancta asserting conciliar supremacy, and it 
interpreted Frequens and Haec sancta as prohibiting papal dissolution 
or transfer of a council without its consent. Thus it was in a period of 
intense conflict between the council and the pope that Nicholas 
arrived at the Basel Council. 
The disputed Trier election was referred to the Committee 
(Deputacio — the Basel Council was divided into committees, rather 
*For the controversy on whether the claim of conciliar supremacy has “ecumenical” 
standing, see Francis Oakley, Council over Pope?, New York, 1970, and the literature 
cited there. On the dogmatic status of Haec sancta, see the literature cited in Erich 
Meuthen, “Der Dialogus concludens Amedistarum Errorum,” in Mitteilungen und 
Forschungsbeitriige der Cusanus-Gesellschaft (MFCG), vol. 8, Mainz, 1970, p. 43. 
xiii 


[PDF page 18]
Introduction 
than “‘nations” as at Constance) on Matters of Common Interest (pro 
communibus) and to the Committee on Peace (pro pace). Nicholas, 
already known to several participants in the council, was made a 
member of the Committee on the Faith (de Fide). He remained in 
Basel in February and March, but in April he returned to Koblenz 
where he was dean of the Church of St. Florin to give an Easter 
sermon, which is still preserved.’ He returned to Basel in May, 
preached in Koblenz in August, returning thereafter to Basel, 
preached in Koblenz at Christmas, and was back in Basel in January 
1433. (The Rhine river made it relatively easy to go back and forth 
between Koblenz and Basel.) In February 1433, Nicholas of Cusa 
was one of those named by the council to negotiate with the Hussite 
delegates from Bohemia and in this connection he wrote a work, De 
usu communionis on the disputed issue of communion under both 
species, i.e. bread and wine. 
Pope Eugene continued to maintain that a council could only be 
valid with the pope’s approval and that its chairman should be the 
representative (/egatus) of the pope. The council answered that it 
alone was infallible and that the pope was only the minister of the 
church as a whole. In April 1433 the council threatened the pope with 
suspension and deposition; in June, it refused to recognize the papal 
representatives; and in July the council threatened to cite the pope for 
contempt (contumacia) and set deadlines for him to recognize its 
validity. It also voted that all church offices should be filled by election 
with papal rights of appointment and reservation to be strictly limited 
to those specified in canon law. In August 1433 under pressure from 
the newly-crowned Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund, Pope Eugene 
formally annulled his earlier bull of dissolution and recognized the 
council’s decrees except for those that “prejudiced the rights of the 
Holy See.” A subcommittee of the Committee on the Faith which 
included Nicholas of Cusa in its membership examined the papal bull 
of submission and pronounced it insufficient, and the council began 
to move in the direction of a formal break with the papacy. On the 
papal side, Pope Eugene issued a bull that condemned as heretical the 
doctrine of conciliar supremacy. The arrival of the Emperor on 
October 11, 1433, introduced a moderating influence as he pressed 
for reconciliation with the pope, and in December, Eugene accepted 
>See Nicolai de Cusa, Opera omnia, xvi, fasc. 3, Sermones I (1430-1441) edited by Rudolf 
Haubst and Martin Bodewig, Hamburg, 1977, Sermo xl, pp. 229-251. 
XIV 


[PDF page 19]
Introduction 
all the demands of the council. The pope revoked all previous bulls 
against the council, declared it legitimate from its inception, and 
recognized as one of the council’s purposes “the general reform of 
the church in its head and members.”* Although he may have 
appeared thereby to accept conciliar superiority, it was clear from 
Eugene’s letters of the time and from his subsequent actions that he 
had no intention of subordinating the pope to the council, a doctrine 
which he viewed as heretical. 
The Composition of De concordantia 
During this period Nicholas wrote his major work of political theory, 
De concordantia catholica (the Catholic Concordance). Nicholas refers in 
the Preface (no. 2) to his use of original sources located in “ancient 
cloisters” and later (111, 3, no. 316) cites a manuscript that he has seen 
in the Cologne Cathedral library, so that he seems to have used 
materials from other locations than Basel. The Concordantia, however, 
was probably written in Basel, following Nicholas’ return from 
Koblenz in early 1433. The early discussions in Book 1 of predestina- 
tion, membership of the church, and the validity of sacraments 
administered by sinful clergy seem to have been influenced by the 
debates with the Hussites (Bohemians) at the council between Janu- 
ary and April 1433. Book 11 uses records of early church councils that 
were probably only available there® and in the same Book, he refers to 
*For details, documentation, and chronology, see Joseph Gill, Constance et Bale-Florence, 
Paris, 1965 (vol. 1x of Histoire des conciles oecumeniques), Johannes Haller, Concilium 
Basiliense, vols. 1-11, Basel, 1896-1897; and Johannes Helmrath, Das Basler Konzil, 
1431-1449, Cologne, 1987. The major documents relating to the Council of Basel have 
been translated into English by C. M. D. Crowder, Unity, Heresy and Reform, 378- 
1460, London, 1977, Part Iv. 
° John of Segovia’s History of the Council of Basel mentions Cardinal Cesarini’s use of an 
ancient collection of the records of earlier councils (Jibrum de antiquis conciliis antique 
scriptum) and notes that Nicholas of Cusa, a close friend (sinmgulariter dilectus) of 
Cesarini’s, argued from an even older collection. Nicholas’ argument as summarized by 
Segovia is similar to that of the Catholic Concordance in distinguishing different types of 
councils and emphasizing the role of the patriarchs in the earlier history of the church. 
See Ernest Birk (ed.), Historia gestorum generalis synodi Basiliensis, Book vu, chs. 14 and 
18 in Monumenta conciliorum generalium seculi XV, vol. ul, Vienna, 1873, pp. 605 and 
612-613. Book 1, ch. 12, no. 54 of the Catholic Concordance refers to the Council as 
“gathered there” (ibi congregatis) which may argue for composition of that chapter 
outside of Basel. There are also minor parallels between passages in Book 1, chapters 1 
and 3 and Cusanus’ Christmas 1432 sermon in Koblenz, (Opera omnia, Xvi, fasc. 3, 
Sermones, Sermo Xvi, p. 271) including a reference to “graduatione concordante et 
harmoniaca.”’ However the bulk of the evidence favors composition in Basel in 1433. 
XV 


[PDF page 20]
Introduction 
“this council” (11, 20, no. 184), mentions decrees adopted in August 
1432 (II, 17, no. 155) and in July 1433 (1, 18, no. 162), and alludes (1, 
26, no. 211) to “a certain little work against the Bohemians,” presum- 
ably De usu communionis, which we know he wrote in Basel in March 
or April 1433. 
The manuscript evidence indicates that initially there was a shorter 
version of the Concordantia, comprising Book 1 and chapters 1-7, 16- 
21, and 26-33 of Book u, which was entitled Libellus de ecclesiastica 
concordantia (Little Book on Concordance in the Church).° It was more 
directly focused on the relations of the pope and council, and did not 
include the more general philosophical discussions of consent or the 
analysis of the constitution of the Holy Roman Empire which are 
contained in the final version of the work. This would explain the shift 
of interest in the course of the work from the attempt in Books 1 and 11 
to describe the patterns of harmony (concordantia) among the spiritual 
authorities to the analysis in Book 1 of the temporal power and its 
relation to the priesthood. 
A short tract on the superiority of the councils to the pope (De 
maioritate auctoritatis sacrorum conciliorum supra auctoritatem papae) 
which has been identified as written by Nicholas is similar in argu- 
ment to, and identical in some of its quotations with, parts of Book 1, 
chapter 16 and Book u, chapters 2, 3, 7, 16, and 20. Since the tract 
was one of a number of such works written in the first part of 1433 
when several council committees at Basel were discussing the 
° The Basel manuscript of the Catholic Concordance contains an earlier introduction (pro- 
hoemium) which gives the title of the work as Libellus de ecclesiastica concordantia and 
summarizes the argument in a way that corresponds to the chapters cited. In addition, 
two sections appear in Book ui that are located in Book 1m, ch. 35 in the final version — a 
quotation from an imperial decree calling the Council of Arles which in the Basel 
manuscript appears in Book i, ch. 7 as well as in Book m1 — and the description of a 
suggested electoral procedure in Book m1, ch. 33 which appears in a slightly different 
form in Book 11, ch. 37. On the dating and order of composition, see Gerhard Kallen’s 
preface to the Latin edition of the Concordantia (Opera omnia, vol. x1v, De concordantia 
catholica, Book 1, Hamburg, 1964, pp. ix-xii) and his article, “Die Handschriftliche 
Uberlieferung der Concordantia des Nikolaus von Kues,” Sitzungsberichte der 
Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, 1963, no. 2, 
pp. 51-59. See also the review of the Latin edition by Werner Kramer in Historische 
Zeitschrift, no. 209 (1969), pp. 143-150. Kramer believes (p. 146) that the Libellus 
continued to exist as a separate treatise. He bases his argument on the presence of a 
work entitled Concordantia ecclesiastica in the description of the books accompanying 
Nicholas at the time of his death in 1464. 


[PDF page 21]
Introduction 
council’s response to the papal bulls including the possible use of a 
decree of nullification (irritans) against papal appointments to church 
offices, the first draft of the Concordantia must have been written after 
this tme. That draft includes the aforementioned reference to a 
conciliar decree adopted in July 1433 (11, 18, no. 162) so that it could 
not have been completed until mid-1433.’ 
Additions were then made to Book u, including the chapters that 
are of most interest to modern students of political philosophy — the 
discussion of the requirement of consent as a prerequisite for 
legitimate law and government (Book 1, chapters 8-15) — along with 
four chapters (22-25) on provincial councils and additional canon law 
references elsewhere in Book nm. Then, the news of the impending 
arrival of the emperor and the announcement in September of the 
convocation of the Reichstag later in the year led Nicholas to extend 
his argument for legislation in councils and elective government 
(although not for conciliar supremacy) to the empire in an additional 
section (Book 1). The last part of Book i from its frequent 
references to the emperor’s presence in Basel (111, 24, nos. 465-468; 
Ill, 40, no. 565; Ill, 42, no. 596) must have been written after October 
II, 1433, the date of the emperor’s arrival. There is no reference to 
the papal submission to the council in December 1433 which was 
known in Basel at the end of January 1434, so that the work was 
probably completed before that time. The use of new sources, 
principally Marsilius of Padua’s Defensor pacis (without acknowledg- 
ment), and a different style indicate that the preface to the third book 
7See Erich Meuthen, “Nikolaus von Kues in der Entscheidung zwischen Konzil und 
Papst,” MFCG, vol. 1x, Mainz, 1971, pp. 19-33; Meuthen, “Kanonistk und 
Geschichtsverstandnis” in Remigius Baumer (ed.), Von Konstanz nach Trient, Munich, 
1972, pp. 147-170, and his careful analysis of the relation of De maioritate and De 
concordantia in the introduction and notes to the published edition, ““Cusanus Texte, 1, 
Traktate 2. De majoritate auctoritatis sacrorum conciliorum supra auctoritatem papae,” 
Abhandlungen der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische 
Klasse, Heidelberg, 1977. Nicholas’ report on February 16, 1433 of discussions in the 
Committee on the Faith of the legal form to be used against the pope is mentioned in the 
records of the proceedings of the Council published in Johannes Haller (ed.), Concilium 
Basiliense, vol. 1, Basel, 1897, p. 350. The council’s debates on the nullification (irritans) 
decree in late 1432 and early 1433 are cited in Haller, Concilium, vol. 1, Basel, 1896, 
p- 111. On the date of composition, and the role of Helwig of Boppard, a fellow 
Padua-trained canon lawyer at Basel, as collaborator with Cusanus in the composition of 
De majoritate and the De concordantia, see Werner Kramer, Konsens und Rezeption: 
Verfassungsprinzipien der Kirche im Basler Konziliarismus, Minster, 1980, ch. 6. 
XVil 


[PDF page 22]
Introduction 
was added after Book m had been completed. The manuscript 
evidence also shows that new final chapters were added to Books 1 
and 111 as well as additional documentation in Cusanus’ hand. 
It seems then that Book 1 and the two versions of Book 11 were 
written after Nicholas’ return to Basel in early 1433, and Book 11 was 
written in the latter part of the same year. The entire work, with the 
possible exception of the preface to Book 1 and the final chapters of 
Books 1 and m1, would then have been submitted to the council at the 
end of 1433 or the beginning of 1434. It is referred to in a work that 
Nicholas wrote in February 1434 so that it had been completed by 
that time, although minor additions may have been made thereafter.* 
Despite its appearance in the midst of a profound constitutional 
crisis in the church, the Catholic Concordance is more than a canon 
lawyer’s brief for conciliar supremacy. Faithful to its title, and to the 
theologically-inspired outlook that characterizes all of Nicholas’ writ- 
ing, it is an attempt to synthesize and harmonize many different and 
apparently conflicting strands in ecclesiological and political theory. 
While Nicholas argues for conciliar supremacy, he also grants that the 
pope possesses an independently-derived position as the divinely- 
intended head of the church. He relies on canon law, the writings of 
the fathers of the church, and the history of the early church councils 
for much of his analysis, but he also relates his argument to general 
philosophical principles of consent and representation that are of 
interest to modern political theorists and to students of the political 
and institutional development of the West. While the Catholic Con- 
cordance was occasioned by a conflict over the internal constitution of 
the church, the last book makes practical suggestions for the reform 
of the empire including an ingenious preferential voting system that 
would be of interest to modern political scientists (111, 37, nos. 535— 
540). In many ways the work appears rigidly formal and traditional in 
substance and form, but it also contains striking anticipations of 
modern concepts and practices — including themes that have received 
renewed attention during the last twenty-five years in the Roman 
Catholic Church in connection with the reforms introduced by the 
Second Vatican Council. 
®See “Cusanus Texte, 1, Traktate 1. De Auctoritate Presidendi in Concilio Generali,” 
Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische 
Klasse, Heidelberg, 1935, p. 27, and English translation by H. Lawrence Bond, Gerald 
Christianson, and Thomas Izbicki, “Nicholas of Cusa, ‘On Presidential Authority in a 
General Council’,” Church History, 59, 1 (March 1990), 19-34. 
xviii 


[PDF page 23]
Introduction 
The structure of the argument 
Because of the way in which the Concordantia was written, a simple 
outline or table of contents is not sufficient to make clear its basic 
structure. It is not as contradictory or confused as some observers 
have claimed, but the basic unity of its argument is sometimes 
obscured, and the reader who begins with Book 1 and reads through 
to the end of the work may find its argument difficult to follow. Book 1 
begins with an elaborate outline of the hierarchical structure of the 
universe and of the church. This is followed by an analysis of the 
relation between the pope and the bishops and the place of Rome in 
the church constitution. Book 11 focuses at greater length on the 
disputed issue of the relation of the pope to the council and the need 
for consent to church law and government. Book 1 on the reform of 
the Holy Roman Empire seems in many respects to be an after- 
thought to the argument already developed. It is less elaborate in its 
argumentation, its sources are cited either too briefly, or at too great 
length (or — in the case of the dependence of the Preface to Book m 
on Marsilius — not at all). Yet it is necessary to consider the work as a 
whole, both in order to understand Nicholas’ fully developed theory 
with its intricate system of harmonies and parallelisms, and to explain 
his subsequent change of loyalties to the side of Pope Eugene IV after 
1437 when he became, in Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini’s phrase, “the 
Hercules of the Eugenians.” 
On the basic issue, Nicholas upholds the doctrine of conciliar 
supremacy over the pope. “Even in the decision on matters of faith 
which belongs to him by virtue of his primacy he is under the council 
of the Catholic Church” (1, 15, no. 61). It is not required that the 
council be called by the pope; in cases of necessity or danger to the 
church the emperor can do so (iil, 15, no. 402). In the face of the 
pope’s persistent refusal to attend, the council once it has met 
“should provide for the needs and welfare of the church” (11, 2, no. 
73; ll, 13, no. 125). “The council has power both over abuses and the 
one who causes the abuses ... Its power is immediately from Christ 
and it is in every respect over both the pope and the Apostolic See” 
(ul, 16, no. 148). It can remove him for heresy and “when he governs 
incompetently” (1, 18, no. 159). The council’s “judgment is always 
better than the individual judgment of the Roman pontiff” (1, 18, no. 
158). “The canons of the ancients [in the early church councils] are 
XIX 


[PDF page 24]
Introduction 
of greater authority than decretals of the popes which contradict them 
— despite what modern writers say” (i, 18, no. 177). “The universal 
council ... has supreme power in all things over the Roman pontiff” 
(II, 34, no. 249). 
Yet Nicholas’ theory is not as simple as the above quotations may 
appear to indicate. The papacy as an institution does not depend on 
the council; it is part of the divinely-established constitution of the 
church with rights and prerogatives of its own. Christ made Peter and 
his successor, the pope, the head of the church “to maintain unity” 
and “to avoid schism” (I, 6, no. 35; 1, 34, nos. 259, 261, and 264). 
The pope is “prince of the bishops” and “he has a rulership over all 
men in the church, for he is captain in that army” (1, 15, no. 61). He is 
“first over the others” (1, 13, no. 126) with inherent powers of 
administration which in Nicholas’ opinion (although, as he admits, 
not that of the Councils of Constance and Basel) cannot be taken 
away from him on a temporary basis (suspension) but only by remov- 
ing him from office (deposition) (11, 16, no. 162). He can grant 
dispensations from church law out of his “personal prerogative” (I, 
20, no. 187). In ordinary circumstances, the pope calls the council 
into session. After waiting “a long time” for him to appear, it can 
proceed without him, but it cannot define an article of faith without 
considering the views of Rome (II, 2, no. 74). The pope is obliged to 
yield to the majority view in the Council, but decisions on matters of 
faith should be unanimous (1, 15, no. 137). He is “judge of the faith”; 
and on matters of faith “the Roman See’, understood as the pope 
acting with his patriarchal council, “can not err” (II, 7, nos. 94-95), 
and declarations on matters of faith by the synod of the patriarchate of 
Rome can not be reversed by the universal council (11, 5, no. 81). 
Nicholas developed his ecclesiological theory in order to resolve 
the apparently contradictory statements in the written records of the 
church concerning the relationship of the pope and the council. Some 
of the early church councils, as well as the recent Council of Con- 
stance, seemed to assert a general theory of conciliar supremacy over 
the pope. Yet statements of the papacy and in church law (including 
the forged Pseudo-Isidorean Decretals) seemed to enunciate a theory 
of papal supremacy. Nicholas, confident as any orthodox medieval 
churchman of the basic underlying harmony and rationality of the 
universe, convinced that the Holy Spirit was providing the guidance 
to the church that had been promised to it by Christ, and trained as a 


[PDF page 25]
Introduction 
canon lawyer in the interpretation and resolution of contradictory 
texts (the basic canon law text, Gratian’s Concordantia discordantium 
canonum, usually referred to as the Decretum, was compiled in order to 
reconcile apparently contradictory canon law texts) was certain that a 
harmonious intermediate position (medium concordantiae) could be 
found. 
His belief in an ordered harmonious universe was derived from the 
version of the Christian world view that was transmitted to the Middle 
Ages by the writings of “Dionysius the Areopagite”, (or Pseudo- 
Dionysius), a fifth-century Syrian Christian disciple of the neo- 
Platonist philosopher, Proclus.’ The opening chapters of the Catholic 
Concordance show the influence of the thought of Dionysius, who was 
mistakenly thought to be the Athenian convert of St. Paul mentioned 
in Acts 17:34. Dionysius wrote, among other works, 7he Celestial 
Hierarchy and The Ecclesiastical Hierarchy describing the hierarchical 
order of the universe beginning with God through nine choirs of 
angels, down to the sacraments, clergy, and people. The clergy, in 
turn, was divided into bishops, priests, and deacons, and the people 
into monks, the faithful, and catechumens. 
Dionysius’ hierarchical and triadic view of the world, as reflected 
and developed by Nicholas at the beginning of the Concordantia, 
begins with nine choirs of angels, continues through nine heavenly 
spheres from the prime moving sphere through the planets, sun, and 
moon to the earth. On earth all nature is divided into rational, sensate, 
and vegetative; man is body, soul, and spirit; and the church is made 
up of sacraments, priesthood, and the faithful. The sacramental 
power of the priesthood is distributed into nine ranks — bishops, 
priests and deacons; subdeacons, acolytes, and exorcists; and readers, 
porters, and tonsured clergy (1, 7, no. 41). 
It is only in the sixth chapter of Book 1 that Nicholas reaches the 
subject of the structure of church government. Although all bishops 
’On Nicholas’ knowledge of Dionysius, see Paul E. Sigmund, Nicholas of Cusa and 
Medieval Political Thought, Cambridge, Mass., 1963, pp. 247-249. Among the more 
important mediators of the tradition of Dionysius was Albertus Magnus (1200-1280), 
whose works Nicholas came to know through his associate at Cologne, Heimericus de 
Campo. At Cologne and in a visit to France in 1428 he also developed a strong interest 
in the Majorcan neo-Platonic mystic, Ramon Llull (1235-1316). The definition of De 
concordantia in Llull’s Ars generalis was borrowed by Cusanus, and he also adapted a 
system of preferential voting suggested by Llull (1m, 37, nos. 535-541). For discussion, 
see Sigmund, Nicholas of Cusa, pp. 59-61. 
XX 


[PDF page 26]
Introduction 
are equal as to sacramental power “nevertheless there is a distinction 
of grades as to governing responsibility [regitivam curam]” (1, 6, no. 
35). In the governmental hierarchy the nine ranks are: subdeacon, 
deacon and priest; above them, dean, archdean, and bishop; and on 
the highest level, archbishop, patriarch, and pope (1, 8, no. 42). At this 
point we would expect him to follow earlier conciliarists (e.g. John of 
Paris) to argue that the consent of the church is required for govern- 
mental authority, as distinct from the sacramental authority that is 
granted by laying on of hands in ordination. Instead, he turns to an 
analysis of the historical record of the church, mobilizes citations 
from canon law in favor of consent to law and government, and moves 
to an argument from original freedom and equality that extends far 
beyond the history and law of the medieval church. 
The historical record shows, Nicholas argues, that the one cathedra 
or ruling authority in the church belongs to all the bishops as suc- 
cessors of the apostles in union with Peter as their head.'” Peter was 
appointed by Christ to that headship with the consent of the other 
apostles, while Rome, Peter’s last see, is the head of the church both 
because of its historical importance as the capital of the empire and 
because of consent of the church, as expressed by the bishops."! 
When he looked at “the original sources, not some abbreviated 
collection” (as he says in the Preface) he found that the first eight 
councils had been called by the Eastern emperors, although papal 
consent and participation by the pope’s representatives had been 
considered necessary to give them ecumenical status. He found that 
the popes repeatedly declared that they were bound by the canons of 
'OTf Peter and his successors are to give the church unity and “prevent schism” (1, 6, no. 
35), this seems to imply a final decision in matters of doctrine. However Nicholas, 
following the doctrine that he found in the writings of St. Cyprian, one of the Fathers of 
the Church, leaves this to a majority (maior pars) of the bishops and priests (1, 14, no. 58 
See also 11, 26, no. 211; I, preface, no. 270). For a linguistic analysis of the various 
meanings of “consensus” as it was used at Basel, and its relationship to majority rule, see 
Josef Wohlmuth, Verstdndigung in der Kirche, Mainz, 1983. 
"|For a similar argument, see Gulielmus Durandus, De Modo Celebrandi Concilii Generalis 
(1311), an annotated copy of which remains in Nicholas’ library at Kues today. On the 
sources of Nicholas’ theory in earlier conciliarist writings, see Paul E. Sigmund, Nicholas 
of Cusa, ch. 4. My chapter does not, however, give sufficient attention to the originality of 
Nicholas’ effort to use the historical records of the early church councils as the basis for 
his conciliar theory. For a breakdown and analysis of the sources cited in the Catholic 
Concordance, see Hermann Josef Sieben, “Der Konzilstraktat des Nikolaus von Kues: 
De Concordantia Catholica,” Annuarium Historiae Conciliorum, xtv (1982), 171-226, 
and Sieben, Traktate und Theorien zum Konzil, Frankfurt, 1983, ch. 2. 
XXii 


[PDF page 27]
Introduction 
the early councils, especially those of the Council of Nicaea. He 
found that in A.D. 451 the Council of Chalcedon reviewed a decision 
of the papal synod and over Pope Leo’s objection successfully raised 
the status of the Patriarch of Constantinople to a point immediately 
below that of the pope in Rome. And he found that the Eighth 
Council (Constantinople IV) held in 869-870 (not recognized by the 
Orthodox Church today), defended the authority of the patriarchs, 
and, while recognizing papal primacy, insisted that the pope was 
subject to the bishops assembled in the universal council and to the 
church laws (canons) that they adopted. 
From Gratian’s Decretum, the authoritative twelfth-century canon 
law collection, Nicholas frequently cites the statement in D.4.C.1 that 
a law must be approved by the practice of those subject to it, as well as 
Gratian’s requirement that bishops and archbishops be elected by 
those under them (1, 18, nos. 163-164, and Il, 32, nos. 232-233). He 
also draws an analogy between the canon law provisions that bishops 
and archbishops must consult their councils on matters that affect the 
diocese or province, and the need for the pope to secure the consent 
of the church as represented by the council, or when it is not in 
session, that of the cardinals acting as representatives of the provinces 
of the church (1, 18, no. 166). 
Almost as an aside in his historical and legal argument (it was 
added in the second version of Book 11) Nicholas also makes a broader 
philosophical argument — the one for which the work is best known — 
the derivation of consent from natural freedom, and equality. In Book 
il, chapter 14, after quoting Gratian to prove that all legislation is 
based on natural law, and arguing that since natural law is based on 
reason, the more rational ought to rule, Nicholas adds the following 
words: 
Therefore since all are by nature free, every governance — 
whether it consists in a written law or living law in the person of a 
prince ... can only come from the agreement and consent of the 
subjects. For if men are by nature equal in power (pofentes) and 
equally free, the true properly ordered authority of one common 
ruler who is their equal in power can only be constituted by the 
election and consent of the others, and law is also established by 
consent. (II, 14, no. 127) 
The appeal to natural freedom and quality as the basis for partici- 
pation in government was something new in the history of political 
Xxili 


[PDF page 28]
Introduction 
thought. It is true that the opening passages of Roman law contained 
the statement, “By the law of nature, all men from the beginning were 
born free’’ (/nstitutes 1, ii), but this had not led the Roman lawyers or 
their later commentators to demand any popular role in legislation or 
government beyond a mythical original transfer of authority by the 
Roman people to the emperor. The belief in natural freedom and 
equality goes back to the Stoics, but its use to support the institution- 
alization of consent through the election of rulers and legislation by 
representative councils was new. 
Corporate consensus vs. individual consent 
Political and economic developments in the late Middle Ages made it 
possible for an argument for the institutionalization of consent to be 
made at this time. In the church quasi-representative corporate 
institutions played a significant role — the college of cardinals, the 
cathedral and monastic chapters; local, provincial, and patriarchal 
synods in the earlier history of the church, and the universal council 
itself which was now enjoying new prestige from having reestablished 
unity in the Western church. In the temporal sphere, the German 
empire had the Reichstag and the electors who chose the emperor. 
The Cortes of Castile had been meeting irregularly since the early 
thirteenth century. The English parliament had assembled with 
increasing frequency since the middle of the thirteenth century, and 
since the end of that century it had regularly included, in addition to 
the lords spiritual and temporal, the representatives of the shires 
(counties) and boroughs. In France the Estates General had been 
called at the start of the fourteenth century in order to strengthen the 
hand of Philip the Fair against Pope Boniface VIII. It was to continue 
meeting sporadically until the beginning of the seventeenth century — 
and then again, fatefully, in 1789. 
These institutions were justified through largely implicit theories of 
corporate and community consent — not through appeals to natural 
equality or freedom. The community acted through corporate groups 
or by consensus rather than by counting heads. Hierarchical con- 
siderations counted for much, and the medieval representatives in the 
English House of Commons, for instance, were always properly 
deferential in their relations with the king and the lords. 
Hierarchical and corporatist conceptions are important in the 
XXIV 


[PDF page 29]
Introduction 
thinking of Nicholas and the other conciliarists too. We need only 
refer to his original cosmological “chain of being” outlined at the 
beginning of the Catholic Concordance or to the canon law controver- 
sies over the relative voting weight of the “larger” and of the 
“sounder” part, which became central to Nicholas’ argument after 
1437 when he joined the side of the pope against the Council of 
Basel. Yet here as elsewhere, political theory in the church anticipated 
later developments in the state. Controversies over the “sounder” 
part in the college of cardinals led to the adoption of the two-thirds 
rule in the twelfth century, on the assumption that the larger (maior) 
part would also be sounder (sanior) if its number was twice as large as 
the minority. The canon lawyers also discussed the relative weighting 
of the votes of head and members of ecclesiastical corporate groups, 
and the fifteenth-century councils (Pisa, Constance, and Basel) 
gradually extended voting rights to all those formally incorporated in 
the council without regard to hierarchical status. (One of Nicholas’ 
later criticisms of the Council of Basel was that it admitted any simple 
priest to vote on the same basis as high church dignitaries.)'* 
There are a number of references to majority rule in the Catholic 
Concordance. In Book 1, 14, no. 59 the true church is made up of a 
“majority” (major pars) of the faithful in union with Peter and his 
chair. St. Cyprian is cited several times to demonstrate that the 
“larger part” of the priesthood will remain free from error (1, 8, no. 
43; I, 4, no. 79, and m1, Preface, no. 270) although the actual quo- 
tation from Cyprian says “the larger and better part” — see no. 43. 
Nicholas also states that in the council the majority “ordinarily” (1, 4, 
no. 79) or “normally” (i, 15, no. 137) rules, although immediately 
following the second assertion, he seems to have some doubts on the 
question (11, 16, no. 138). Then, it appears, a reading of Marsilius’s 
Defender of Peace rekindled his enthusiasm. At the end of Book 1 and 
in the Preface to Book 1, written after the rest of the work, there are 
'2 Arguing at the 1441 Reichstag, Nicholas cited a case in which the Basel Council had 
used the vote of a personal servant of one of the bishops in order to break a tie, and 
asked, “Does not one pope or prince have greater authority in his vote than one 
manservant?” (Hermann Herre [ed.], Deutsche Reichstagsakten, vol. Xv, part 2, Gotha, 
1914, p- 763). Nicholas also attacked the deposition of Pope Eugene IV by the Basel 
Council in 1439 on the grounds that it had only a few bishops and no archbishops 
present (Helmut Weigel [ed.], Deutsche Reichstagsakten, vol. X1v, part 1, Stuttgart, 1933, 
p. 348). At both Constance and Basel cardinals and bishops were considerably outnum- 
bered by the lower clergy who once admitted as members had the right to vote (see Gill, 
pp. 207-208). 
XXV 


[PDF page 30]
Introduction 
repeated favorable references to the rule of majorities (11, 34, no. 261, 
and 11, Preface nos. 270, 276, 278, and 283). The anticipation of later 
ideas is all the more striking in the claim early in Book m that consent 
is required because of “the common equal birth of all men and their 
equal natural rights” (11, 4, no. 331). 
It would be a mistake, however, to attribute modern democratic 
conclusions involving universal suffrage to his theory of consent based 
on natural freedom and equality. When he described his proposed 
conciliar structure for the church, it was distinctly hierarchical. 
Nicholas endorses legislation by an early Spanish council, quoted in 
the Decretum which appeared to mandate the election of priests. At 
the very least, he declares, priests should be appointed by the bishops 
with the consent (in the sense of absence of opposition) of the faithful. 
Bishops are to be elected by cathedral chapters representing the 
priests of the diocese with the (apparently tacit) consent of the laity. 
Archbishops would be elected by bishops with the consent of the 
clergy. They in turn would elect (i.e., appoint) cardinals as represen- 
tatives of the church provinces to elect and advise the pope (i, 18, no. 
164). In all cases and especially in that of the universal church, 
legislation on each level should be adopted by the appropriate con- 
ciliar body and the earlier practice of holding diocesan, provincial, 
and national councils should be revived. The result is an ambitious 
attempt — the first on such a broad scale — to give institutional expres- 
sion on a regular basis to earlier inchoate ideas about consent to law 
and government. 
Theories of representation — personification versus 
delegation 
To move as Nicholas does from a general requirement of church 
consent to an argument for the councils as the expression of that 
consent requires a theory of representation. In Haec Sancta, its decree 
on conciliar superiority, the Council of Constance had based that 
superiority on the fact that “representing the Catholic Church [it] 
holds its power directly from Christ” and the Council of Basel had 
reaffirmed that decree. Yet as the unrepresentative character of the 
Council of Siena in 1423-1424 and the small initial attendance at 
Basel suggested, some kinds of guidelines had to be established to 
determine just when a council was truly representative, and when it 


[PDF page 31]
Introduction 
was a pseudo-council (conciliabulum). On the basis of his reading of 
the records of the Eighth Council Nicholas cites among the require- 
ments for a “full universal council” the participation of the five 
patriarchs which he then reinterprets as the “heads of the whole 
church”. The council can proceed if all have been called and a 
majority (p/ures) are present (II, 3, no. 75). 
Who are the heads of the church? Although at one point Nicholas 
allows the admission of “chosen and learned priests,” church practice 
before the fifteenth century and Nicholas’ own view restricted those 
with voting rights (diffinitio et statuendi potestas) to the bishops (11, 16, 
nos. 138-139. Cf. also 1, 17, nos. 408-410). How do the bishops 
represent the faithful? Nicholas replies that they are united to him, 
since “the church is in the bishop” (St. Cyprian, quoted in the 
Decretum C. 7 q.l. c.7) and “as the universal church is the Mystical 
Body of Christ, so particular churches are the mystical bodies of those 
who preside over them as representatives of Christ.” The bishop 
“represents and symbolizes (figurat) the church as a public person” 
(ul, 6, no. 37). 
This mystical or “virtual” theory of representation is then used to 
demonstrate that the council is superior to the pope. The council 
contains more “‘public persons” — patriarchs, cardinals, archbishops, 
and bishops — and “‘the more specific the headship, the more certain 
the representation” (11, 18, no. 163) so that it is more representative 
than the pope alone who only represents the church in a very general 
way (confusissime). Like the theories of tacit or implicit community 
consensus which had formed part of the common assumptions of 
medieval political thought, the theory of representation as impersona- 
tion (the ruler as the “personification” of his subjects — /etat, c’est moi) 
could provide a rationale for the most oppressive tyranny. Indeed it 
only needed a bit of neo-Platonic philosophizing about absorptive 
hierarchy to provide a rationale for the papalist position that Nicholas 
adopted after 1437. 
Yet his theory of representation contained more modern elements 
as well. Through a hierarchical system of councils the lower ranks 
would have a voice, although a limited one, in church government. 
The councils are described as made up both of the presiding officers 
(praesides) and of representatives (/egati) of the various groups in the 
church who give the consent of all the faithful (1, 34, no. 248). The 
cardinals represent the church provinces and they take the place (vices 
XXVil 


[PDF page 32]
Introduction 
gerunt) of the others in electing the pope and approving papal dispen- 
sations (II, 21, NO. 93; Il, 24, NO. 202; Il, 34, no. 262). The council and 
the cardinals derive their legitimacy from those below rather than 
from those above them, and from the laity (in an indirect fashion) as 
well as from the clergy. The promise of infallibility that Christ made 
to the whole church is fulfilled more directly by the universal council 
than by the pope alone because it more certainly represents the 
church and the majority (maior pars) of the priesthood which St. 
Cyprian had said would always maintain the true faith and law of 
Christ. Similarly in the empire and kingdoms “legislation ought to be 
adopted by those who are bound by it or by a majority of their 
representatives because ... what touches all should be approved by 
all” (1, Preface, no. 270).'8 
Like the movement from corporate, implicit, or quasi-unanimous 
consent (consensus) to individual voting on a regularized basis, the 
movement from representation as impersonation to representation as 
the result of the conscious selection of another to take action on 
behalf of an individual or group (delegation) marks an important 
transition in the development of modern political theory and practice 
that is anticipated in the Catholic Concordance. In words that sound 
strikingly modern Nicholas asserts that “all power both spiritual and 
temporal rests potentially in the people” (11, 19, no. 168) and “ruler- 
ship comes from God through men and councils by means of elective 
consent” (II, 34, no. 249). 
Parallel hierarchies in church and empire 
A similar tension between authoritarian and “democratic” elements 
in Nicholas’ theory can be found in the last book of the Catholic 
Concordance which deals with the German empire and temporal 
government in general. It too contains a theory of a hierarchy of 
offices reflecting the triadic organization of all creation. Yet where 
Pope Boniface VIII in his bull, Unam sanctam (1302) had appealed to 
“the Blessed Dionysius” in support of the strict subordination of 
temporal authority to the head of the spiritual hierarchy, Nicholas 
asserts not hierarchical subordination but parallelism. The emperor is 
'5 On the history of the “quod omnes tangit” (“what touches all” . . .) principle, see Gaines 
Post, Studies in Medieval Legal Thought: Public Law and the State, 100-1322, Princeton, 
1964, ch. 4. 
XXVill 


[PDF page 33]
Introduction 
the “one ruler of the world exercising his authority over the others in 
the plenitude of power, and in his own sphere he is the equal of the 
Roman pontiff in the temporal hierarchy on the model of the 
sacerdotal hierarchy” (11, 1, no. 293). 
There were two problems, however, with any attempt to draw an 
exact parallel between the spiritual and temporal orders. The first was 
the existence in Christendom of kings like those of France and Eng- 
land who did not acknowledge a duty of subordination to the Holy 
Roman Empire. Already in the thirteenth century Pope Innocent III 
had recognized in his decretal, Per venerabilem, that “the king of 
France recognizes no superior in temporals.” (At the council itself 
there had been problems with the order in which the representatives 
of the emperor and of the kings of other European countries would 
walk in formal processions.) To save the notion of the superiority of 
emperor, Nicholas relies on the emperor’s religious role as protector 
(advocatus) of the church. While it is true that imperial jurisdiction 
that does not extend to kings and princes “who de facto or because of 
exemption do not recognize the overlordship of the empire” all are 
subject to imperial legislation on the enforcement of conciliar decrees 
(Ill, 7, mos. 355-356). Although the Roman empire originally 
included a major part of the world (in terms of area, although he also 
argues on the basis of population — see m1, 6, nos. 343 and 346), 
Nicholas recognizes that its medieval successor controls a more 
limited area so that the medieval emperor’s normal jurisdiction 
extends only to those who habitually obey his rule, and through the 
electors of the empire have given their consent to his election. 
However, when the emperor “exhorts the bishops and commands the 
laity” (111, 15, no. 399) in the convocation of the council and enforces 
its decrees, he is to be obeyed by all Christians, and because of his 
religious role he can participate in the council as the Eastern 
emperors in the early councils did. In this role he is “the minister of 
God” and “the vicar of Jesus Christ on earth” (Il, 5, no. 341). 
The second problem in Nicholas’ structural parallelism between 
church and empire is that while he had seen the universal council as 
the instrument of reform in the church, in the empire he looked 
primarily to Emperor Sigismund. Even in church affairs, it was 
Sigismund who had been primarily responsible for the success of the 
Council of Constance and his arrival at Basel in October 1433 raised 
Nicholas’ hopes that he would play a similar role there. He is thus not 
XXIX 


[PDF page 34]
Introduction 
concerned to demonstrate the superiority of the Reichstag to the 
emperor — although at one point Nicholas asserts that it is “the 
common opinion of the doctors” that the emperor can be deposed by 
the people who elected him (in, 4, no. 339). Like the pope in the 
universal council the emperor in his imperial council (Reichstag) com- 
prising the electors, princes, senators, judges, and representatives of 
the cities and towns is to meet to judge cases and work out common 
legislation for the whole empire (1, 25, nos. 469-472. See also II, 35, 
nos. 519-531 for a description of the smaller annual conventus com- 
prising the emperor, the electors, and the judges of the empire). Like 
the pope too, the emperor would have a daily council “to advise him 
and defend the public good” (1, 12, no. 378). 
The parallelism of church and empire is carried further. Nicholas 
lists three ranks in the empire, as in the church (11, 25, no. 471). He 
describes the emperor’s relationship with the other kings as parallel to 
that of the pope as first among the patriarchs, and compares dukes to 
archbishops and counts to bishops ‘“‘and so on with the rest” (I, 1, 
no. 293). Yet there is no mention of a hierarchical system of elected 
bodies like those that he had described in the church nor any discus- 
sion of the accountability of the emperer to the Reichstag. Nicholas’ 
failure to complete his scheme of parallel concordances may be 
attributed to lack of time since it is clear that the last book of the 
Catholic Concordance was hastily written. It is more likely, however, 
that an emphasis on the restraining role of the Reichstag or other 
representative bodies did not suit his ultimate purpose in Book 11, the 
reform of the empire. The problem in the church as he saw it was 
excessive centralization in the papacy; the problem in the empire was 
just the reverse. To remedy it he recommended the creation of a 
strong imperial standing army, a centralized treasury and tax system, 
and a common judiciary — based on district courts — all to be 
established under the emperor’s sponsorship at the forthcoming 
Reichstag. Stronger limits on the emperor were not in his view 
necessary, and the extension of the conciliar structure to lower levels 
of the empire would have weakened the chances for the adoption of 
the reforms that were his basic concern. 
Nicholas was also concerned to strengthen the empire by 
demonstrating its independence of the papacy. In this connection, he 
once again demonstrates a remarkable historical sense and an ability 
to marshal documentary evidence as he traces the constitutional 


[PDF page 35]
Introduction 
history of the German empire and criticizes the papalist arguments 
for the pope’s superiority to the emperor. Best-known is his attack on 
the authenticity of the Donation of Constantine on the basis of the 
analysis of the historical documents (111, 2, nos. 300-308), but he also 
raises doubts about what later turned out to be forged papal letters 
included in the Pseudo-Isidorean collection (no. 309). His interest in 
geography and astronomy is also displayed in Book m1, chapter 6 when 
he discusses the geographical extension of the empire — an interest 
that led to the production of one of the first maps of Western Europe 
in the late Middle Ages." 
At the end of the work, Nicholas’ knowledge of medicine is demon- 
strated in an elaborate organic analogy comparing the officers of 
church and empire to the parts of the human organism, including an 
extended comparison (in somewhat questionable taste) between the 
process of legislation and the ingestion and digestion of food. The 
considerable lengths to which the analogy is carried are an indication 
of how thoroughly medieval is the outlook of the Catholic Concordance 
and how far it is from the modern democratic theory with which it has 
sometimes been linked. Nicholas was concerned with reform, not 
revolution. This reform was to be orderly, legal, and in a sense 
reactionary — that is, it should recapture the harmonious order that 
had existed in the church in the period of the great ecumenical 
councils in the East — especially the Eighth Council (Constantinople 
IV, 869-870) and in the German empire in the days of Emperor Otto 
I (955-983) when “everything tended to the common good” (1m, 28, 
no. 495). While Nicholas believed in the possibility of a reconciliation 
of divergent tendencies, “a coincidence of opposites” to use the 
phrase that he made famous in his later work, On Learned Ignorance 
(1440), persistent dissension and incapacity to come to agreement was 
a sign that a church meeting was not inspired by the Holy Spirit, “the 
author of peace and concord,” since one of the signs of a genuine 
council was that it was concluded in harmony, and on matters of faith, 
even unanimously (II, 15, no. 137, and I, 34, no. 248). “Where there 
is dissension, there is no council” (I, 1, no 69 quoting Gratian’s 
Decretum). 
"Cf. “Cusanus und die Geographie,” in Nikolaus Grass (ed.), Cusanus Gedéichtnisschrifi, 
Innsbruck, 1970, part IV. 
XXxi 


[PDF page 36]
15¢ 
Introduction 
The shift to papalism 
His belief in harmony, his attachment to law and order, his strong 
interest in reunion of the Eastern and Western churches, and the 
considerable authoritarian and hierarchical elements in his world 
view, all help to explain his change from the conciliarist to the papalist 
positions in 1437. When the Council of Basel, influenced by a grow- 
ing French delegation hostile to the Pope, took an increasingly anti- 
papal position and when it also became apparent that the Greeks had 
no interest in negotiating with the squabbling churchmen in northern 
Switzerland, Nicholas was more and more inclined to place his hopes 
for church reform in a strong pope working through a unity council in 
Italy, in a manner parallel to the hoped-for reform of the empire to be 
carried out by a strong emperor working through the Reichstag. In 
the Preface to Book m Nicholas had strongly endorsed elective 
monarchy as the best form of government, and as the Basel Council 
arrogated more and more papal prerogatives to itself (e.g. canoniza- 
tion of saints, payment of church taxes and fees, establishment of fast 
days, etc.) it seemed to exemplify that “plurality of rulers” which 
Nicholas described in the Preface as a bad form of government (no. 
282, repeating the argument of Marsilius, Defensor pacis, D. 1, c. 17, 
no. 1). When the members of the council in favor of meeting the 
Greeks in an Italian city, including Nicholas, his former teacher, 
Cardinal Cesarini who had given up the chairmanship of the council, 
and three cardinals and twelve bishops, were heavily out-voted by 
those who supported Basel or Avignon in France, the atmosphere was 
compared by Aeneas Sylvius to the conduct of drunkards in a 
tavern.'*> On May 20, 1437, Nicholas left Basel along with two 
bishops and the two representatives of the Greek Church, and went to 
Bologna to get papal confirmation before going to Constantinople to 
assist in making arrangements for the Greeks to come to Italy for a 
unity council. 
After 1437 Nicholas was an ardent papalist — but at the same time 
he made efforts to demonstrate a substantial continuity between his 
papalist and conciliarist thought. Thus in his appearances at the 
Reichstag where he endeavored to secure imperial support for the 
‘... ut modestiores in taberna vinaria cernas bibulos,” Letter to Peter of Nocetus, 
reproduced in J. D. Mansi, Sacrorum conciliorum nova at amplissima collectio, vol. Xxx\, 
Venice, 1798 (reprinted, Paris, 1906), p. 223. 
XXXxil 


[PDF page 37]
Introduction 
pope against the remnant of the Basel Council — an effort which was 
only finally successful in 1448 — he argued that Basel was no longer 
valid because it did not have the consent of the church.'® Both at the 
Reichstag meetings and in 1460 when as a cardinal he submitted a 
reform proposal to Pope Pius II (himself the former conciliarist, 
Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini), he described the college of cardinals as 
the embodiment of the consent of the church.'” Even in the pro-papal 
letter that he wrote in 1442 to Rodrigo Sanchez de Arevalo, later used 
by post-Reformation defenders of the papacy like St. Robert Bel- 
larmine, he maintains an emergency power for the church against an 
erring pope. While he describes the church as the “unfolding” (exp/i- 
catio) of Peter and views the various church offices as particular 
expressions of a power contained (complicata) in its fullness in the 
pope, he still asserts that the power to govern the church was given by 
Christ to both the pope and bishops, the successors of Peter and the 
other apostles, and says that if the pope violates “‘the statutes of the 
holy fathers” thus “exceeding the limits of his authority,” the church 
can “withdraw” from him.'* 
In fact this limitation was nearly meaningless. The cardinals con- 
tinued to be named by the pope. After the Council of Ferrara— 
Florence in 1438-1439 that briefly reunited the Eastern and Western 
churches, no councils were held for the rest of the century. A dwin- 
dling number of participants in the Basel Council continued to meet 
until 1449 and even elected an anti-pope, but they were gradually 
16 For analysis of the arguments at the Reichstag, see Sigmund, Nicholas of Cusa, ch. 9 and 
A. J. Black, Monarchy and Community: Political Ideas in the Later Conciliar Controversy, 
1430-1450, Cambridge, 1970, part 11. Black has also analyzed the arguments at Basel 
itself in Council and Commune: The Conciliar Movement and the Fifieenth Century Heritage, 
London, 1979. The book devotes major attention to the writings of John of Segovia, but 
includes a discussion of Cusanus’ role (pp. 51-57). 
"The Reformatio generalis is printed in Stephan Ehses, “Der Reformentwurf des 
Kardinals Nikolaus Cusanus,” Historisches Jahrbuch, Xxxul (1911), pp. 281-297. In his 
reform proposal, Nicholas calls the cardinals the representatives (/egat7) of the “nations” 
(not, as in the Catholic Concordance the church provinces) who give the consent of the 
faithful to the election of the pope and form the daily full council of the church. Aeneas 
Sylvius’ diary also records a confrontation between himself as pope and Nicholas over 
the naming of new cardinals without securing the consent of the present membership, a 
procedure which Nicholas said was contrary to the decrees of the Council of Constance. 
See Leona C. Gabel (ed.), Memoirs of a Renaissance Pope, New York, 1959, p. 228. 
'8 Pyistola Nicolai de Cusa ad Rodericum de Trevino, Appendix 3, in Gerhard Kallen (ed.), 
“De Auctoritate Presidendi in Concilio” (Cusanus-Texte), in Sitzungsberichte der 
Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschafien, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, 1935-1936, 
no. 3, Heidelberg, 1935, pp. 110-111. 
XXXili 


[PDF page 38]
Introduction 
abandoned by most of Christendom. After the union with the Greeks 
in 1439. Pope Eugene IV was able to secure the endorsement at 
Florence of his bull, Moyses vir Dei, which condemned the doctrine of 
conciliar superiority. The conciliar theory seemed dead. 
In fact, however, it was not. The Council of Trent discussed con- 
ciliarism and Cardinal Bellarmine quoted Nicholas. Appeals to the 
council were still made by the French church, and the Gallicanist 
theory as expressed in the writings of John Major in the sixteenth 
century, and of Bossuet a century later continued to assert conciliar 
supremacy over the Pope. The example of the actions and claims of 
Constance and Basel were not lost on later proponents of parlia- 
mentary supremacy in seventeenth century England.'? Aside from 
some isolated references to his argument against the Donation of 
Constantine, however, Nicholas of Cusa’s political writings were not 
directly influential on later theorists although there is a link to John 
Locke by way of the constitutionalist writings of George Lawson 
whose Politica sacra et civilis (1659) mentions ““Cusanus”’ favorably.”° 
Only in recent times, in connection with the renewed constitutional 
discussions within the Roman Catholic church during and after the 
Second Vatican Council, has his theory been used to argue for 
reforms such as the synod of bishops and the increased participation 
of laymen in church decisions. 
The transition to modern constitutionalism 
To the student of the history of political thought, the thinking of 
Nicholas of Cusa, the greatest of the conciliar theorists, is of continu- 
' See Francis Oakley, “On the Road from Constance to 1688,” Journal of British Studies, 1 
(1966), 1-31, reprinted in Natural Law, Conciliarism, and Consent, London, 1984; Paul 
E. Sigmund, “Konzilsidee und Kollegialitat nach Cusanus,” MFCG, v (1965), 86-97, 
and Sigmund, “Das Fortleben des Nikolaus von Kues in der Geschichte des Politischen 
Denkens,” MFCG, vu (1969), 120-128; Black, Council and Commune, ch. 16, and Brian 
Tierney, Religion, Law and the Growth of Constitutional Thought, 1150-1650, Cambridge, 
1982, pp. 81, 97-98. 
*° Lawson only knew Cusanus indirectly as one of several conciliar theorists. Locke read 
Lawson’s Politica in 1679, shortly before he began to write the Tivo Treatises. It included 
an argument from community consent similar to that of Locke. See Julian H. Franklin, 
John Locke and the Theory of Sovereignty, Cambridge, 1978, chs. 3-4. However, see Conal 
Condren, George Lawson’s Politica and the English Revolution, Cambridge, 1989, who 
analyzes the important differences between the two theories on such topics as majority 
rule, individual consent, revolution, and property (pp. 181ff) and dismisses Franklin’s 
claim that Locke “found” his central argument “ready-made” in Lawson as “sheer 
fantasy” (p. 5). 
XXXiv 


[PDF page 39]
Introduction 
ing interest. It is the expression of a fascinating transitional period in 
political thought and practice. For the first time the considerable 
theoretical limits that medieval constitutionalism placed on the ruler 
were given concrete institutional expression. A political theory was 
developed to defend those institutions, and the aspiration of medieval 
Christendom to the rule of law was given a political application that 
moved it in the direction of modern constitutionalism and even of a 
version of the separation of powers.*! The doctrine of original 
freedom and equality that had been asserted by the Stoics and given a 
Christian interpretation by the church fathers became in Nicholas of 
Cusa’s theory something more than a part of the myth of a lost golden 
age. It was made the justification for continuing consent through 
permanent representative institutions. The theory of natural law that 
was part of the common heritage of the West began to acquire in his 
thought the critical role that was so important in its later development. 
In the Catholic Concordance this role was reformist rather than revolu- 
tionary, but this marked a shift from an earlier stage when natural law 
was used mainly to justify existing political and social arrangements. 
The same kind of shift in the meaning and application of generally 
accepted terms takes place in Nicholas’ theory of representation. 
However strong the religious and traditional justifications for his 
authority, the ruler had always been regarded as in some sense the 
representative of his people. The law too was viewed as inhering in 
the people as a whole and even in the early Middle Ages, the inquest 
was used to find out what the law of a given locality or group was. In 
Nicholas’ theory, however, the people must give their consent — usu- 
ally, but not always, implicitly — to their rulers, and the foundations 
were laid for the belief that legislatures can make legally binding new 
legislation through representatives who are responsible to the 
geographical or corporate group that has elected them.” 
Moreover, these legislative bodies were to meet on a regular or 
continuing basis. The conciliar structure outlined by Nicholas was 
71 See I, 13, NO. 123 and 14, nos. 129-130 on the separation of legislation and adjudica- 
tion, and Hl, 15, no. 137 on papal subordination to conciliar legislation. Note, however, 
that the pope participates in church legislation as a member of the council (I, 15, no. 
137). 
22n the development of “proctorial” representation in the late Middle Ages, see Gaines 
Post, Studies in Medieval Legal Thought, ch. 3. On the late medieval basis of modern 
constitutionalism, see Quentin Skinner, The Foundations of Modern Political Thought, 
Cambridge, 1978, tl, ch. 4. 
XXXV 


[PDF page 40]
Introduction 
not merely an emergency procedure but an integral part of the 
government of church and state. In the church, universal councils 
were to be held at least every ten years in accordance with the decree, 
Frequens, of the Council of Constance, and a representative and per- 
manent college of cardinals in Rome was to limit the exercise of papal 
power. In the empire, the Reichstag, annual smaller meetings of the 
electors and judges, and a daily council of advisors were all part of 
Nicholas’ scheme for constitutionalizing the exercise of power. It took 
three centuries for popular participation to be institutionalized in the 
temporal sphere and over half a millennium for it to become part of 
the constitution of the Catholic Church. (See the discussions at the 
Second Vatican Council of the role of “the people of God.”) 
Nicholas’ proposals were a remarkable anticipation of later develop- 
ments in both realms. 
He also saw a need for the decentralization of authority in the 
church. Thus, the bishops had an autonomous, not derivative, role; 
judicial appeals were to go no further than the church provinces or 
patriarchates (I, 31, no. 227); and legislation was to be adopted by 
decentralized diocesan, provincial, or national councils. He did not 
deal with the problems of federalism as we have seen them in the 
subsequent political evolution of the West but he clearly saw the 
advantages of a balance between centralization and decentralization in 
decision-making. 
Since his theory is more constitutionalist than democratic it is 
something of an exaggeration to describe Nicholas of Cusa as Gierke 
does as “among the leading champions of popular sovereignty.” 
Nicholas’ belief that the emperor backed by coercive force could be 
the agent of reform in the secular sphere foreshadowed his shift to the 
side of the papacy after he recognized that a deeply-divided council, 
however lofty its goals, could not carry out the needed reforms in the 
church. A strong ruler working in cooperation with a corporately- 
organized legislature was his chosen agent of ordered reform — not a 
populist omnicompetent body bent on subordinating the executive to 
its will, as the Council of Basel was threatening to become. The latter 
group could not have the unity, the determination, or the resources to 
carry out the reform within the framework of orthodoxy that Nicholas 
desired. Western Europe at the beginning of the modern period, like 
3 Otto von Gierke, The Development of Political Theory, trans. Bernard Freyd, New York, 
1939, P- 149. 
XXXV1 


[PDF page 41]
Introduction 
parts of the third world today, found authoritarian solutions more 
efficient than democratic ones and the movement in Nicholas of 
Cusa’s political thought from a qualified conciliarism to a qualified 
papal absolutism helps to explain why this was the case. 
There is a curious ambiguity in Nicholas’ attitude towards the mass 
of men. Unlike Marsilius who has a certain confidence, based 
perhaps on his experience in the Italian city-state, in the soundness of 
the judgment of the ordinary man, Nicholas describes him as stupid, 
inclined to evil, and generally irrational in his decisions.”* To support 
his view he quotes the Book of Ecclesiastes in the Old Testament, 
and it may be that the doctrine of Original Sin also has something to 
do with his attitude. Yet there is another religiously-inspired attitude 
in his thought that makes him more optimistic — his belief in the 
harmonious order of the universe as created by God, and in the 
continuing action of Divine Providence to assure that that harmony 
can make itself known. Thus, he believes that the less intelligent will 
accept the suggestions of their betters by a “certain natural instinct”; 
that “where two or three are gathered together, Christ is in their 
midst” (i, 3, no. 77, and I, 1g, no. ror); and that the Holy Spirit will 
ensure that valid church councils will come to harmonious agreement 
on the truth. 
This ambiguous attitude has been present throughout the history of 
Christian thought. Man’s inclination to evil has been emphasized by 
Christian theorists both to justify authoritarian rule or in support of 
constitutional limitations on power. Yet the Christian belief in the 
action of God guiding the individual or the group to the truth has also 
inspired men to form self-governing religious communities and sects 
and it underlies many early attempts at democratic government. 
Nicholas’ thought, here as elsewhere, combines these contradictory 
elements in a fragile synthesis. 
From tradition to modernity 
The movements from authoritarian rule to participation in decision- 
making, from hierarchy to equalitarianism, from implicit consent and 
virtual representation to the conscious election of responsible 
24+«The number of the stupid is infinite” (11, 16, no. 138); “We are drawn to the forbidden 
and prone to evil from adolescence” (I, 29, no. 454). See also I, preface, nos. 
272-275. 
XXXVil 


[PDF page 42]
Introduction 
representatives, are all part of a broader change in the West from a 
traditional to a more modern society. Theorists of modernization have 
defined this process in many ways. They have described it in terms of 
an increasing rationalization of relationships and thought, the 
replacement of ascriptive with achievement norms, a movement from 
status to contract, from dependence to autonomy, from particularism 
to universalism, and from fragmentation to centralization of authority. 
The Catholic Concordance can be viewed as a theoretical expression of 
one stage in this process of transition to modernity. Nicholas of Cusa 
is neither as thoroughly modern as some of his interpreters have made 
him nor as thoroughly medieval as others have described him. His 
political thought is indeed a “coincidence of opposites,” and, in fact, 
his synthesis of papal monarchy and conciliar representative institu- 
tions remained viable even in his own thinking for only a little over 
three years. Divine-right monarchy triumphed for a time in church 
and state but the other part of his theory, the rule of law and 
regularized participation through representative instititions, became 
the basis of modern constitutional democracy. We may not have his 
faith in the possibilities of achieving a “universal concordance” but 
his attempt to do so combines many of the seemingly contradictory 
elements in ancient and medieval thought and points towards the new 
forms that they will take in modern times. 
This discussion has been concerned with the interpretation of the 
complex synthesis that resulted from that attempt to combine oppos- 
ing elements. It is hoped that making available to a modern audience 
an analysis and an English translation of the political thought of a 
writer who died over five hundred years ago “can help toward a 
deeper understanding of our political traditions in their relevance for 
the contemporary world.” The problems that Nicholas tried to 
resolve are still with us today. How can legitimate authority be 
reconciled with individual freedom? What is the proper balance 
between centralized and decentralized institutions and how can 
individuals and groups participate in decisions that affect their 
welfare? How can the relationship between religion and politics best 
be understood and given institutional expression? What do the 
history, tradition, and religious ideas of the West have to contribute to 
the search for beliefs and institutions adequate to the needs of the 
25 Alan Gewirth (trans.), Marsilius of Padua, The Defender of Peace, New York, 1956, p. xvii. 
XXXVIli 


[PDF page 43]
Introduction 
contemporary world? Study of the Catholic Concordance, like that of 
other great classics of the history of political thought, can “make us 
aware of what these unsettled questions are [and] present us with the 
best fruits of creative minds struggling to arrive at answers.””° If there 
is a “Western Political Heritage,” the Catholic Concordance is an 
important and original expression of its most central elements in a 
crucial period at the beginning of the modern age.* 
26Robert Dahl, Modern Political Analysis, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1963, p. viii. 
*The following chapters are recommended for course assignment: Bk. 1, chs. 2, 7, 8, 
15-17; Bk. u, chs. 1, 2, 8, 12-19, 21, 33, 34; Bk. m, Preface, chs. 1-6, 25, 29-33, 
36-41. 
XXX1X 


[PDF page 44]
Sources 
Acta Cusana, ed. Erich Meuthen and Hermann Hallauer, vol. 1, 1 (1401- 
1437), Hamburg, 1976—, (documentary sources on Cusanus’ life). 
Cusanus Texte, 1, 1, De auctoritate presidendi in concilio generali, ed. Gerhard 
Kallen, in Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften, 
Philosophisch-historische Klasse, 1935-1936, no. 3, Heidelberg, 1935. 
Cusanus Texte, 11, 2, De matoritate auctoritatis sacrorum conciliorum supra auc- 
toritatem papae, ed. Erich Meuthen, in Abhandlungen der Heidelberger 
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, 1977, no. 
3, Heidelberg, 1977. 
English translation, “On Presidential Authority in the General Council,” 
trans. H. Lawrence Bond, Gerald Christianson, and Thomas M. 
Izbicki, Church History, 59, 1 (March 1990), 19-34. 
French translation, Nicolas de Cues, Concordance catholique, trans. Roland 
Galibois, Sherbrooke, Quebec, 1977. 
Italian translation in Nicolo Cusano, Opere religiose, trans. Pio Gaia, Turin, 
1971, ‘La concordanza universale,” pp. 115-546. 
Nicolai de Cusa, Opera omnia, vol. x1v, De concordantia catholica, ed. Gerhard 
Kallen, Hamburg, Book 1, 1964; Book 1, 1965; Book 111, 1959. Indices 
(with Ann Berger), 1968. 


[PDF page 45]
Select bibliography 
Bett, Henry. Nicholas of Cusa. London, 1932. 
Biechler, James E. “Nicholas of Cusa and the End of the Conciliar Move- 
ment: A Humanist Crisis of Identity.” Church History, 44, 1 (March 
1975), 5-21. 
Black, Antony. Council and Commune: The Conciliar Movement and the Fifteenth 
Century Heritage. London, 1979. 
Crowder, C. N. D. (ed. and trans.). Unity, Heresy, and Reform: The Conciliar 
Response to the Great Schism. London, 1977. 
Gill, Joseph. Constance et Bale-Florence. Paris, 1985. 
Heinz-Mohr, Gerd. Unitas Christiana. Trier, 1958. 
Helmroth, Johannes. Das Basler Konzil, 1431-1449. Cologne, 1987. 
Kramer, Werner. Konsens und Rezeption: Verfassungsprinzipien der Kirche im 
Basler Konziliarismus. Minster, 1980. 
Jacob, E. F. Essays in Late Medieval History, New York, 1968, chs. 5-6. 
Meuthen, Erich. Das Trierer Schisma von 1430 auf dem Basler Konzil. Minster, 
1964. 
Nikolaus von Kues, 1401-1464, Skizze einer Biographie. 6th edn, Munster, 
1982. 
Oakley, Francis. Natural Law, Conciliarism, and Consent. London, 1984. 
Posch, Andreas. Die ‘“‘Concordantia Catholica” des Nikolaus von Cues. Pader- 
born, 1930. 
Sieben, Herman Josef. “Der Konzilstraktat des Nikolaus von Kues: De Con- 
cordantia Catholica.” Annuarium Historiae Conciliorum, 14, 1 (1982), 
171-226. 
Traktate und Theorien zum Konzil. Frankfurt, 1983. 
Sigmund, Paul E. “Cusanus Concordantia: A Reinterpretation.” Political 
Studies, 10, 2 June 1962), 180-197. 
Nicholas of Cusa and Medieval Political Thought. Cambridge, Mass., 1963. 
Stieber, Joachim W. Pope Eugenius IV. Leiden, 1978. 
Tierney, Brian. Foundations of Conciliar Theory. Cambridge, 1955. 
xli 


[PDF page 46]
Selected bibliography 
Religion, Law, and the Growth of Constitutional Thought (150-1650). Cam- 
bridge, 1982, ch. 3. 
Vagedes, Arnolf. Das Konzil iiber dem Papst? 2 vols., Paderborn, 1981. 
Vansteenberghe, Edmond. Le Cardinal Nicolas de Cues. Paris, 1920. 
Watanabe, Morimichi. The Political Ideas of Nicholas of Cusa with Special 
Reference to his De Concordantia Catholica. Geneva, 1963. 
“The Episcopal Election of 1430 in Trier and Nicholas of Cusa.” Church 
History, 39, 3 (1970), 299-316. 
For further bibliographies and current research consult the publication of the 
Cusanus Gesellschaft, Mitteilungen und Forschungsbeitrage der Cusanus-Gesells- 
chaft (1961ff.) and the American Cusanus Society, Nems/etter (198 4ff.). 
xlii 


[PDF page 47]
1387-1417 
I40I 
1414-1418 
1416 
1417-1423 
1423-1424 
1424 
1425 
1426 
Chronology 
Great Schism. As a result of a disputed election after the 
return of the papacy from Avignon to Rome there are two 
and, after 1409, three claimants to the papal throne. 
Nicholas Krebs (Cryfftz) born in Kues (Latin—Cusa) on 
the Moselle river near Trier. 
The Council of Constance meets to end the schism. In 
1415 adopts decree, Haec sancta, asserting conciliar 
supremacy in “matters of faith, extirpation of schism, and 
reform of the church in head and members.” In 1417, 
council votes to meet at regular intervals in the future, one 
claimant to the papacy resigns, two are deposed, and the 
council elects Martin V as pope. 
Nicholas registers at the University of Heidelberg as 
“Nycolaus Cancer de Coesse,” identified as “‘a cleric from 
the diocese of Trier.” (Cusanus was in minor orders and 
was not ordained as a priest for another twenty years.) 
Studies canon law at the University of Padua, receiving 
degree of doctor decretorum. 
Council of Siena meets and adjourns, calling for another 
council in seven years. 
Cusanus visits Rome for the first time. 
Registers at University of Cologne as doctor in canon law. 
Teaches canon law and studies philosophy. 
Practices law in archdiocese of Trier. 
xliii 


[PDF page 48]
1427 
1428 
1429 
1430 
1431 
1432 
1443 
1434 
Chronology 
Italian humanists write of the discovery of classical manu- 
scripts in Cologne cathedral library by “Nicholas of Trier” 
(Nicolaus Treverensis). Travels to Rome as secretary of 
the Archbishop of Trier where he obtains papal grants, 
confirmations, and dispensations allowing him to hold 
several benefices in the archdiocese of Trier, which carry 
endowed income. Henceforth he identifies himself as 
“dean of the church of St. Florin in Koblenz.” 
University of Louvain offers Cusanus professorship of 
canon law which he declines. Offer repeated in 1435. 
Travels to Rome, bringing eleventh-century manuscript of 
sixteen plays of Plautus, now in Vatican library. 
Nicholas returns to Trier after the death of the archbishop, 
becomes chancellor of Ulrich von Manderscheid, a can- 
didate for the archbishopric. Disputed election appealed to 
pope, who appoints an outsider, Raban, bishop of Speyer, 
as archbishop. Cathedral chapter elects Ulrich, with 
Nicholas as witness. 
Nicholas submits appeal to meeting of the Reichstag on 
behalf of Ulrich’s candidacy, citing “divine and natural 
law” and “the will of the clergy and people” (Meuthen, 
Acta Cusana 1, 41 and 43). Church Council opens in Basel 
to consider church reform and the Hussite heresy. 
On February 29, Nicholas is formally incorporated in the 
council to argue Ulrich’s appeal of the papal decision. He 
is appointed to the Committee for the Faith. 
From February until April, Cusanus is involved in discus- 
sions with the Hussites (Bohemians) on the reception of 
the Eucharist under two species, leading to his treatise, 
Opusculum contra Bohemorum errorem: De usu communionis. 
In April he writes a legal brief on the supremacy of the 
council over the pope, De maioritate concilii. In mid-year 
writes Libellus de ecclesiastica concordantia, later incorporated 
as Book 1 and part of Book 11 of De concordantia. Late in the 
year he completes De concordantia catholica, submitting it to 
the council in December or January. 
In February, writes treatise On the Authority of the President 
in a General Council (De auctoritate presidendt). 
xliv 


[PDF page 49]
Chronology 
1435 
1436 
1437 
1438-1439 
1439-1447 
1439 
1448 
1450 
1452-1460 
1453 
1460 
1464 
Council forbids payment of annates and other taxes to 
Rome. 
Discussions at Basel with representatives of the Greek 
church on the site of a proposed union council. Nicholas 
votes for a site “favored by the pope and the Greeks.” 
Council majority insists on Basel or Avignon, with the 
minority including Cusanus favoring a location in Italy. On 
May 20 along with other members of the defeated minority 
Cusanus goes to Bologna, is appointed by the pope as a 
member of the papal delegation to Constantinople, and 
negotiates the participation of the Byzantine emperor and 
representatives of the Greek church in a union council in 
Italy. 
Council of Ferrara—Florence negotiates unification of 
Eastern and Western churches (immediately repudiated in 
Constantinople) and condemns doctrine of conciliar 
supremacy. 
Nicholas argues the papal side against the representatives 
of the council at the meetings of the German Reichstag. 
Nicholas publishes his best-known work, On Learned 
Ignorance (De docta ignorantia). 
Reichstag and princes support the papal side, leading to 
1449 vote by remaining participants to dissolve rump 
council at Basel. Nicholas is named cardinal of the Church 
of St. Peter in Chains in Rome. 
Nicholas named Bishop of Brixen (Bressanone) in the 
Tyrol. Sent on reform mission in Germany. 
In Brixen, involved in continual conflicts with Sigismund, 
Duke of the Tyrol. 
Publishes De pace fidei (On Peace in Faith) — arguing pos- 
sibilities of agreement among the principal religions. 
Submits reform proposal to Pope Pius II, calling for elec- 
tive college of cardinals representing the “nations” of 
Christendom. 
Dies in Rome. His body is buried in the Church of St. 
Peter in Chains, his heart in front of the altar of the chapel 
xlv 


[PDF page 50]
Chronology 
at Kues, built at his instruction along with a library for his 
books and a home for the aged. Still functioning today, it is 
probably the oldest private foundation in Europe. 
xlvi 


[PDF page 51]
Hinschius 
Jaffe 
Kallen, OCC 
Mansi 
MG 
PG 
PL 
Abbreviations 
Hinschius, Paulus (ed.), Decretales Pseudo-Isidoriana, 
Leipzig, 1863. 
Jaffe, Philip (ed.), Regista Pontificum Romanorum, 
Leipzig, 1885. 
Nicolai de Cusa, Opera omnia, vol. xtv, De concordan- 
tia catholica libri tres, Gerhard Kallen (ed.), Hamburg, 
1959-68. 
Mansi, J. D. (ed.), Sacrorum conciliorum nova et 
ampliissima collectio, Florence, 1759. 
Monumenta Germaniae Historica. 
Migne, J. P. (ed.), Patrologia Graeca, Paris, 1857. 
Migne, J. P. (ed.), Patrologia Latina, Paris, 1844. 
xlvii 


[PDF page 52]


[PDF page 53]
The Catholic Concordance 


[PDF page 54]


[PDF page 55]
PREFACE 
1. The matters being debated by this holy Council of Basel — which 
might easily be considered novel by those who when doubts arise rely 
unquestioningly on modern writers — demand that we make known 
some of the learning of the ancient authors, long neglected by those 
who are experiencing our current difficulties, and that we 
demonstrate the superior qualities of our more enlightened forebears. 
The discord that has arisen has produced this work by the action of 
heaven, overcoming our natural disposition and lack of preparation or 
previous notice. 
2. Who, Lask, would not have been surprised, a few years ago, at the 
events which we have now seen that have demonstrated the great 
power of the universal councils — so long dormant, to the detriment of 
the public good and the orthodox faith? But we see that the past is 
being sought once more by those who pursue all the liberal and 
mechanical arts. As if the wheel had come full circle, we eagerly 
return to the weighty opinions of those authors. We see that all are 
delighted at the eloquence and style of ancient letters. This is especi- 
ally true of the Italians who, not satisfied with the literary excellence 
that is appropriate to their nature as Latins, devote great effort, 
following in the footsteps of their ancestors, to the writings of the 
Greeks. We Germans, however, although not far behind in native 
ability, must — because of the different position of the stars, not 
through our own fault — defer to others in the pleasing exercise of 
eloquence — since we are able to speak Latin correctly only with great 
effort, overcoming, as it were, the force of nature. 
Other nations should not be surprised to read in the documents 
quoted below things that they have not heard before. For I have 
collected many original sources that have long been lost in the 
armories of ancient cloisters. Those who read these things therefore 
should be aware that they have been quoted here from the ancient 
originals rather than from some abbreviated collection. I ask that my 
uncultivated style not deter anyone from reading, for an open and 
clear meaning, humbly expressed without disguise, is more easily 
understood even if it is less appealing. Nevertheless I hope that this 
collection will be pleasing to all, especially, however, to the partici- 


[PDF page 56]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
pants in this holy Council, and in particular to you, Sigismund, our 
invincible emperor crowned by the will of God, as well as to the 
worthy Cardinal Giuliano [Cesarini], the most gentle [papal] legate to 
our nation. If this work is approved by two such lofty authorities, no 
one would be justified in rejecting what they have endorsed. 
3. In my treatise on the Catholic concordance, I believe that it is 
necessary to examine that union of faithful people that is called the 
Catholic Church, as well as the parts that together make up that 
church — i.e., its soul and body. Therefore we will consider first the 
church itself as a composite whole, then its soul, the holy priesthood, 
and thirdly its body, the holy empire. And everything will be studied 
on the basis of ancient approved sources, as necessary to understand 
the substance, the nature, and the combinations and joinings of its 
members, so that we can know the sweet harmonious concordance 
that produces eternal salvation and the safety of the commonwealth. 


[PDF page 57]
BOOK I 
THE CHURCH IS A CONCORDANCE OF ALL 
RATIONAL SPIRITS UNITED IN SWEET HARMONY 
WITH CHRIST, THE WAY, THE TRUTH, AND THE 
LIFE, WHO IS THE SPOUSE OF THE CHURCH 
4. Since anyone endowed with the slightest intelligence can draw 
the proper conclusions if he knows the basic principles, I will begin 
with a few words concerning the underlying divine harmony in the 
church. Concordance is the principle by which the Catholic Church 
is in harmony as one and many — in one Lord and many subjects. ! 
Flowing from the one King of Peace with infinite concordance, a 
sweet spiritual harmony of agreement emanates in successive degrees 
to all its members who are subordinated and united to him. Thus one 
God is all things in all things.* From the beginning we have been 
predestined for that marvelous harmonious peace belonging to the 
adopted sons of God through Jesus Christ who came down from 
heaven to bring all things to fulfillment. 
5. The Apostle [Paul] writing to the Ephesians demonstrates this 
when he says at the beginning that a man shall leave his father and 
mother and cleave to his wife and they shall be two in one flesh.’ This 
is a sacrament [which symbolizes the union] of Christ and the church. 
If then the union of Adam and Eve is a great sacrament in Christ and 
the church it is certain that just as Eve was bone of the bone of her 
husband and flesh of his flesh so also the church is made up of the 
members of Christ, bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. Thus 
Ambrose in Letter xvi 7o /renaeus praises this epistle of Paul, “No 
1 For the source of this definition in Ramon Llull, Ars Generalis, see Paul. E. Sigmund, 
Nicholas of Cusa and Medieval Political Thought, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 1963, p. 61. 
47 Cor. 15:28. 
3Eph. 1:15. 


[PDF page 58]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
epistle has bestowed such blessings on the people of God as this 
one.” And he says that Christ sits at the right hand of the Father and 
we all “will not only sit but will be seated together with Christ as his 
flesh in heaven.” But in order for us to achieve that union of eternal 
harmony in faith, he has set up a concordance of the different grades 
in the church “making some apostles, others bishops, others teachers 
...” so that each one “united in faith and knowledge may be in touch 
with the head so that, so to speak, every member is present in Christ 
who is head of all. From him one body of the faithful, united and 
joined in rational harmony with the Word in every branch of the 
ministry, helps to increase his body proportionately in charity so as to 
produce one temple and one spiritual dwelling-place for all. Here I 
think we are to understand that there is a union in faith and the spirit, 
not only of the saints but of all the faithful and of all the heavenly 
hosts and powers so that by a certain concordance. of powers and 
ministries one body made up of all spirits of a rational nature adheres 
to Christ, their head, forming the framework of the church edifice in 
such a way that the links between the individual adherents are not 
perceived by the senses.”* This and other excellent things are said by 
Ambrose above. Jerome agrees in the next to the last section of his 
letter To Algasia, and in his letter, On Monogamy, he says: “Eve 
signifies the church, because she is the mother of all the living; Adam 
signifies Christ; their marriage is a spiritual union. Christ is the head 
of the woman, and the woman, that is the church, is formed from the 
side of the man and is flesh of his flesh.”” There are many writings of 
the saints on this subject that I think I must omit for the sake of 
brevity. 
6. And since it is very evident that every living being has been 
created in harmony [concordantia], so also in the divine Essence where 
life and existence are one and completely equal there is a most infinite 
concordance because no opposition can be present where there is 
eternal life. But every concordance is made up of differences. And the 
less opposition there is among these differences, the greater the 
concordance and the longer the life. And therefore life is everlasting 
where there is no opposition. On this basis you can perceive the basic 
principles of the most holy Trinity and Unity because it is a unity in 
*See St. Ambrose, Letters, trans. Sister Mary Melchior Beyenka O.P. New York: Fathers 
_of the Church, 1954, no. 85, pp. 476-480. 
> Ci. PIE 22) pp, 1031 and 1053. 


[PDF page 59]
Book I, para. 8 
trinity and a trinity in unity, and there is no opposition internally since 
whatever the Father is, so also are the Son and the Holy Spirit. 
Behold the ineffable concordance that exists in a God who is three- 
fold and unitary. From it anyone who wishes to study further the way 
in which all the perfections that can be asserted or thought of God 
exist in the greatest concordance of one essence and three persons 
can derive the most lofty and incomprehensible truth to be seen with 
the eyes of the intellect. 
7. Since this concordance is highest truth itself — but this is not our 
principal subject — it is sufficient to cite the comment of Albertus 
Magnus on the words, “Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God” 
(Matt. 16) that “the Father is the source of life, which is channeled 
through the Son and flows to all things in the Holy Spirit.’’° For in the 
unity of the spirit there is a marriage between Christ and the church. 
As Cyprian says in On the Unity of the Church, “Whoever wishes to 
have God as his father can not be born again to life except through the 
Church, the mother of all living men.”’ Then, since he is united in 
spirit to Christ, he is a member of Christ and with our adherence and 
agreement, Christ transforms each of us according to our rank. As 
Augustine says to Consentius concerning the Trinity, “God, since he 
is life itself, gives us life when we are in some manner made sharers in 
him. Since he is justice itself, he brings forth justice in us when we 
live justly in adherence to him, and we are more or less just in 
proportion as we adhere more or less to him. Therefore it is written of 
the only-begotten Son of God that as he possesses the wisdom and 
justice of the Father always in him, he has become for us the wisdom 
and justice and holiness and redemption of God. Accordingly it is 
written, ‘He that glorieth in himself let him glory in the Lord.” 
8. In summary therefore, we may say that Christ is the way, the 
truth, and the life, and the head of all creatures, the husband or 
spouse of the church, which is constituted in a concordance of all 
rational creatures — with him as the One, and among themselves, the 
many — in various [hierarchical] gradations. 
® Albertus Magnus, Commentarius in Matthaeum, 16:18 in August Bourgnet (ed.), Alberti 
Magni Opera omnia, Paris, 1890, 20, p. 638. 
7St. Cyprian, De unitate ecclesiae, ch. 6 (PL 4, p. 519). 
‘St. Augustine, 4d Consentium (PL 33, p. 461). 


[PDF page 60]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
GHAPTER If 
THE RELATION OF THE MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH 
TO CHRIST IS ONE OF DIFFERENT GRADATIONS. 
THIS LS TILEUSTRADED BY DHberecA Vi PRU Sir Ds By 
SAINT AMBROSE OF A MAGNETIC STONE AND THE 
ARRANGEMENT OF IRON RINGS THAT ARE 
ATURAG DED.) Onli GER Elle RAR @ EUG Aves OUR EIR: [OF 
ERE CHURCH] IS ANALYZED ON THIS BASIS. 
g. Now let us investigate more closely how we should understand 
this fundamental principle, that the church is organized on the basis 
of union with Christ. First, all things in creation flow from one eternal 
and perfectly simple God and reflect him in varied ways and in 
different degrees of perfection. The highest first created things 
[angels] participate symbolically in the First Principle through a 
certain God-revealing concordance. However, since a finite creature 
is incapable of concordance with the infinite they are infinitely 
removed from the original infinite concordant essence in which the 
Son is the image and splendor of the Father and three persons are 
one God, the eternal Light. Nevertheless it [the angelic rank] is the 
highest in its own mode of existence since it adheres to the Supreme 
Being and is self-directing, and it exceeds other created things to the 
degree that it resembles the uncreated simple Infinite Being. From 
here, by an emanation of their nature, they transmit a lesser degree of 
the [divine] likeness, and the lower levels of creation are hierarchically 
ordered, so to speak, as shadows, figures, or likenesses of the preced- 
ing higher natures. At last this process of multiplication into lower 
and less worthy beings exhausts its life-giving force, coming to rest at 
a final point, with no remaining power but only enough for itself 
which it is unable to communicate further. And so the last member of 
that order ends in darkness. And such is the gradation from the 
Infinite down to nothingness, that all the intermediate gradations 
depend on the First Principle and nothing in the whole hierarchical 
order can be carried out by intermediaries except through the action 
of the originating Principle. 
10. To illustrate my point I shall cite the example that Ambrose 
gives in his letter to Sabinus.' To explain the decline of human nature 
'St. Ambrose, Ad Sabinum (PL 16, p. 1193). 
8 


[PDF page 61]
Book I, para. 12 
in subsequent generations, he gives the example of a magnetic stone 
which has such power to draw iron to it that it transmits its magnetism 
to that material so that if one carries out an experiment in which 
several iron rings are brought near that stone, it holds them all in the 
same way. Then if you should move another ring next to the one that 
is held to the stone and place the individual rings in order, while the 
natural attraction of the stone holds them all in order, it attracts the 
ones that are nearer more strongly, and those further away less 
intensely. Thus I think of the Word from above as like a magnetic 
stone the power of which extends through everything down to the 
lowest being. Its infinite power is not lacking down through the ranks, 
but there is a marvelous order of interconnection among finite and 
limited creatures. 
11. In the overall order, all created things demonstrate the Trinity, 
since they are either spiritual, corporeal, or mixed. Spiritual things are 
divided into three orders and each order is divided into three choirs, 
so that throughout the heavenly choirs of angels there is a hierarchical 
unity and the sign of the Trinity — a unity in trinity and trinity in unity. 
And so who can capture the hierarchical subdivisions in each choir 
from the highest to the lowest angel, and then within each angel in 
terms of its constitutive principles?* If you look further, you can find 
this hierarchy repeated in its own way in corporeal nature — as three 
orders with three choirs in each. Just as the highest sphere in this 
hierarchy, the prime mover or ninth sphere, is like the shadow of the 
lowest angel, so the earth is its lowest reflection — the basest of the 
elements. There is also a third or mixed type of nature which is 
modeled on the others because it is composed of the rational, the 
sensate, or the vegetative, and in this there are also orders and choirs 
as among the angels. And [the realm of] the elements is the shadow of 
this hierarchy. We will discuss this elsewhere. 
12. These matters are important because the investigation of all 
things in nature and the whole of creation depends on them. For 
when the concordance of differences in the whole universe is 
Ce Dionysius the Areopagite, The Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, 1, 3; The Celestial Hierarchy, 4, 
2, translated in Pseudo-Dionysius, Complete Works, New York: Paulist Press, 1987. 
Many medieval writers including St. Bonaventure and Hugh of St. Victor, as well as 
Peter Lombard, The Sentences, spoke of the nine choirs of angels. For discussion by 
Nicholas of Cusa before the composition of the Concordantia, see his Christmas 1430 
sermon printed in Nicolai de Cusa, Opera omnia, xvi, 1, Sermones 1, 1430-1441, Fasc. 1, 
Sermo 1, no. 14, citing Dionysius. 


[PDF page 62]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
examined, wise men perceive that there is a marvelous combination in 
nature, the whole world shares in a mutual spherical interaction, and 
everything is ordered to a single end. Suffice it for our present investi- 
gation to know that as all created things are constituted as such from 
created beginnings in a certain graded similarity to the First 
[Principle] and are preserved in union and harmony with their natural 
originating source, the church which is our subject is made up of the 
rational spirits [angels] and men who are united with Christ - 
although not all in the same way but hierarchically, as is evident from 
the example of the magnet. 
GHAR GE Re In 
FROM THE BEGINNING TO THE END Ji TIME THE 
CHURCH IS ONE AS CHRIST IS ONE. CHRIST WHO 
ALONE IS THE TRUTH IS EXPRESSED IN VARIOUS 
SCRIPTURES, SIGNS, AND SACRIFICES APPROPRIATE 
TO THE TIME AND PLACE, ALTHOUGH IN A 
CLEARER MANNER AT ONE TIME THAN ANOTHER. 
THE MEMBERS OF [THE BODY OF] CHRIST WERE 
ENDOWED WITH INCREASING HOLINESS AND 
TRUTH UNTIL THE COMING OF CHRIST. FROM 
THEN UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD, THEY HAVE 
SUCCESSIVELY BEEN OF LESS HOLINESS AND 
TRUTH. PARADISE SIGNIFIES THE REIGN OF THE 
CHURCH. 
13. Now it is indicated above by Ambrose that the holy church 
which blessed Paul calls the heavenly Jerusalem, our mother, the 
lasting city established by God, a house not built with hands, consists 
of angels and men.' Part of the church reigns now with God in 
heaven, being made up of men who in different ranks enjoy the 
society of the angels. Part, however, is a wayfarer in various ranks on 
earth and aspires to the society above where there is a tabernacle not 
made by hands nor of this creation which is the model of the 
"St. Paul, Galatians 4:26; Hebrews 13:14; Cor. 5:1. 
Io 


[PDF page 63]
Book I, para. 14 
tabernacle made by Moses when God commanded him to do all 
things as he directed him on the mountain. And in this true tabernacle 
in heaven which God and not man has made, the Highest Bishop of 
our faith, the Eternal Pontiff in an everlasting priesthood, the High 
Priest according to the order of Melchisedech, has entered behind 
the veil, that is into heaven itself, by shedding his own blood to obtain 
a holy and eternal redemption.’ He sits at the right hand of the Father 
in the glory of the Father’s majesty and intercedes for us not with 
words but in acts of mercy. The King of Kings and Lord of Lords 
through whom kings reign and legislators determine what is just, rules 
a heavenly and earthly government — indeed the whole universe, 
whether a spiritual realm in heaven or a temporal realm on earth. He 
disposes and directs it in its various orders and he rules over a 
heavenly and earthly court. In accord with the needs of the times he 
assigns their duties to angels and men in a wondrous order and 
decrees what is to be done at each time whether by private inspiration 
or more public direction. 
14. The holy doctors demonstrate in many passages that when the 
soul feeds on the food of wisdom it becomes a sharer in the divine 
nature.’ For the Son is the Wisdom of the Father. And as Ambrose 
writes in his twelfth letter to Irenaeus, God revealed this Faith in 
Christ through the prophets and the apostles and the treasure of his 
scriptures, so that we might know here by faith and there see face to 
face.* There is more on this subject in that letter. Likewise Augustine 
in the second question of his Letter to Deogratias in which he speaks at 
length about the problem of the diversity of sacrificial rites, says that 
the one Christ is thus expressed in different sacrificial ceremonies in 
accordance with the time and place just as the same idea is expressed 
in a variety of languages.° And this variety was established and com- 
manded for the salvation of men by God who is never lacking in 
justice and goodness to mortals. For one and the same religion is 
observed at one time by some customs and signs, at other times by 
others, earlier in a more hidden fashion and later more openly, earlier 
by a few and later by a larger number. Hence, as he adds on the same 
subject in the third question, there was a gradation among these 
* Hebrews 7:9. 3 Peter 1:4. 
+ Galatians 3:26 in St. Ambrose, 4d Horontianum (PL 16, p. 1126). 
St. Augustine, Ad Deogratias, Letters of St. Augustine, trans. Sister W. Parsons, New York: 
Fathers of the Church, 1953, 1, pp. 158ff. 
II 


[PDF page 64]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
sacrifices because the first ones were like foreshadowings and the 
later ones like figures of Christ who was truth. And, as was pointed 
out in the preceding chapter, since all created things exist because of 
Christ and for him and the one world is filled with the one God who is 
the Word Incarnate, from the beginning, perhaps his [Christ’s] com- 
ing was revealed by degrees in sacrificial rituals and through the 
increasingly clear light of the prophecies of men. John [the Baptist] 
who pointed him out with his finger from among the sons of women 
was the most holy prophet before him, and the apostles followed after 
him. And as there was a gradation from Christ, true God and man, 
back to the first man at the beginning of time, so will it be from his 
time until the end. And Augustine [writing] Zo Hesychius On the Last 
Day says: “Although there have always been bad men, there will be 
many more as we approach the end. But we know that evil men now 
abound among us, and after this they will be even more in evidence 
and they will be everywhere when the end is at hand that will not be 
known beforehand ... But we know that we act as apostles in the 
world today, but much more so those who preceded us and we more 
than those who follow after us until those come who, if we may use 
the expression, will be the last of the last.’ 
15. And this is the essential truth — nothing else is shown in signs 
and sacrifices in all the scriptures but God and the Word made flesh 
which was crucified for us. Paul knew this alone, and we are invited to 
believe this in faith, so that we may cry out in spirit and in faith as 
adopted sons of God in the church, “Abba, Father,” and may be as 
sons of God when we all rise again incorrupt, and see face to face that 
Eternal Light of which Ambrose writes at greater length in his 23rd 
letter, to Irenaeus. For, as he likewise writes in his 30th letter, to the 
same person, just as it was appropriate that man was made last among 
created animals as the end of nature, “so among men the end of the 
Law is Christ for the justification of everyone who believes. And thus 
we are as beasts of burden in the contemplation of the Lord, as the 
Prophet says, ‘I have been considered as a beast of burden before 
ihicenns! 
16. Thus he is the Good Shepherd and we are the sheep of his 
flock. And this is our fundamental premise — that the Word is the 
wisdom of Father, and wisdom is life (Proverbs 8). Thus every 
St. Augustine, Ad Hesychium (PL 33, p. 913). 
St. Ambrose, 4d Horontianum (PL 16, pp. 1126 and 1184). 8John 10-14. 
12 


[PDF page 65]
Book I, para. 18 
rational creature that has been or will be on earth must adhere to the 
Word, and sin which was the cause of death both among the angels 
and men was contrary to the wisdom of God. For the angel who 
wished to be like the Most High raised himself up against wisdom. 
And the same was true of man, who wished to be like gods in the 
knowledge of good and evil. And so for all of human nature since the 
fall, life comes from adherence to faith in the mediator, the Incarnate 
Word. 
17. Hence it is not inappropriate to consider that Paradise as God 
created it in the beginning was a symbol of the reign of the church, for 
in its center was the tree of life which would have offered unfailing life 
to rational creatures in heaven and on earth. From the beginning 
the unfailing fountain of the Holy Spirit that nourishes the Church 
flowed over its roots and that fertile tree always bore the fruit of life to 
nourish those united to it. But heaven’s creature [Adam] opposed this 
life and turned to the tree of knowledge since he wished to be like the 
Most High, although not by participation in the wisdom which was 
from all eternity, since he had desired to know and wished to eat of 
the Tree of Knowledge. Thus man rejected faith as the way to be like 
the Most High; he wished to know before he believed. 
18. Observe that the wisdom which is life (Proverbs 4) and the life 
which is Christ, was lost by those creatures. As Ambrose says in On 
Faith: The Son of God is the wisdom of God, “for coming from the 
heart of the Father, he has opened the hidden secrets of heaven to 
believers.’ He says, “‘to believers,” because, as he also writes to 
Simplicianus, only the Son knows the Father — and those to whom he 
has revealed him.'° And no one apprehends the mysteries of heaven 
without the revelation of the Son. “For the apostles or prophets who 
have dared to speak of the majesty of God or of heavenly things have 
done so because of a revelation granted to them.” On Christ as 
wisdom, justice, holiness, fortitude, etc., see St. Jerome as quoted in 
[the Decretum], [C.] 11 q. 3 [c. 84] evistimant. Hence it is clear how 
wrong were the earlier spirits and men who attempted to come to life 
and truth without using that Way. From this we conclude that the 
Catholic Church is established in union with Christ by faith, for 
without faith it is impossible to achieve the longed-for eternal glory or 
the vision of God and the Lord Jesus, the Savior. 
’ Phoebadius, De fide (PL. 20, p. 42) — not Ambrose. 
0 Matthew 11:27 in St. Ambrose, Letters, no. 56, p. 3081. 
13 


[PDF page 66]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
CHAPTER UAV 
DHE GHORCH [SiGOMP OSE DEORF DERE PPAR Saab bik, 
CHURCH TRIUMPHANT, THE CHURCH SLEEPING, 
AND THE CHURCH MILITANT. THE CHURCH 
MILITANT MAY BE CONSIDERED IN DIFFERENT 
WAYS — EITHER AS LEADING TO THE CHURCH 
TRIUMPHANT IN HEAVEN AND THUS MADE UP OF 
THE PREDESTINED [FOR SALVATION], ORSAS LHOSE 
UNITED AT THE PRESENT TIME WITH GOD IN FAITH 
AND CHARITY, OR ONLY IN FAITH. THE GCHURGH 
MAY BE COMPARED TO AN ARMY AND TO OTHER 
EXAMPLES. THIS 1S AN ESPECIALLY VALUABLE 
CHAPTER TO ELIMINATE MANY DOUBTS AND 
CORRECT ERRORS. 
1g. Brevity requires me to speak at less length than I have done at 
the outset. And so coming directly to our purpose — to find the 
symbolism of the Trinity in the church — we now find that the church 
has three orders; namely, the church triumphant [in heaven], the 
church sleeping [in purgatory] and the church militant [on earth] and 
that every order again is divided into three choirs with many addi- 
tional threefold gradations in each choir. Passing over the hierarchies 
of the church triumphant and sleeping and turning to the church 
militant, I think we should consider what [Pope] Leo IX writes in the 
37th chapter of his letter against the claims of Michael of Constan- 
tinople in which he says: ““The very structure of the parts of the body 
should teach us about the structure of the church, for it is the Body of 
Christ. And the Apostle [Paul] says; ‘You are one body, and members 
of each other.’' And as there are many members in one body but they 
all do not perform the same functions, so we are many as one body in 
Christ and members individually each of the other.” And below: “If 
the eye were the whole body, where would the hearing and other 
senses be? But in accordance with his will, God has assigned to each 
of the individual members of the body their proper function. However 
a member that is not content with its function but desires to take over 
another disturbs the total order of the body, as if the sight attempted 
'y Cor. 12. 
14 


[PDF page 67]
Book I, para. 22 
to hear sounds or the hearing to see colors. Thus the adornments of 
some individual members do not suit others but each requires its own 
and rejects what is unsuitable for it. For the foot refuses the helmet 
and crown, and the head sandals, and so there is a concordance of 
differences [discors concordia| among them so that each of them 
absolutely refuses to give over its function to another. They enjoy 
together the good of one member just as they suffer in common any 
evil, and they carry out their functions not only for themselves alone 
but rather for mutual benefit. Thus the Apostle clearly says: ‘If one 
member is glorified, all the members rejoice together’.’”” 
20. The above quotation is sufficient along with the one at the 
beginning of the chapter where speaking to the Patriarch Michael and 
to the Archdeacon Leo, he [Leo [X] writes: “Let us be one body and 
spirit, just as we have been called in one hope.” From this it is evident 
that the pope and the patriarchs and all Christians constitute one body 
in which there are various members — each content with his office so 
as not to disturb the whole order. Hence in the diversity of members 
we can perceive the hierarchical order in harmonious unity without 
which a hierarchy cannot exist, since there must be a concord of one 
and many, in one head and many members. 
21. And -—to say a few appropriate words out of the many that could 
be said — in this body of the church which thus adheres to Christ in 
the spirit dwells the Spirit which gives life to the whole body and to 
every member of it. The whole soul is in the whole body and in every 
one of its parts, as Augustine argues at length [in his letter] to 
Dardanus, On the Presence of God.’ And therefore this animal body 
derived from Adam has been made spiritual through regeneration in 
Christ. In this regeneration, the dead body in Christ has risen as a 
new more spiritual man like a spotless bride who has been betrothed.* 
In the battle he has achieved victory over death, and a new-risen 
spiritual incorruptible spouse is brought to an everlasting matrimonial 
union. 
22. Itis evident that the body of the church which has these charac- 
teristics is made up only of the predestined, for only those called 
before the establishment of the world will come to that inheritance. 
And because this decision is unknown to all men — for no one knows 
*Leo IX, Ad Michaelem, Patriarcham Constantinopolitanum (PL 16, p. 1275). 
3St. Augustine, Letters, New York, Fathers of the Church, rv, p. 187. 
+Eph. 5:27. 


[PDF page 68]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
whether he is worthy of [God’s] hatred or of love’ — and considering 
that any believer who does the will of God becomes one in spirit with 
him by consent and thus contracts a betrothal for a future marriage, 
we say that the church is made of the predestined [for heaven] and the 
foreknown [as lost]. For God, since he acts for the best, distributes 
saving grace to whoever is disposed and capable [of receiving it]. But 
because not every member of this church militant will succeed in 
consummating this marriage, man is on trial since by his misdeeds he 
may lose the final victory over death. The hour of death tells who is 
predestined and who foreknown. Before that time the foreknown can 
sometimes be in grace, and the predestined in mortal sin, although 
one of the foreknown could not have had the grace of God without 
adhering to the faith. Therefore he is in the church at that time, and 
in this way all those who are now in the state of grace are considered 
as members of the church. 
23. We may also consider the church as a faithful bride, obedient to 
her loftier and nobler part and confined and restrained in order to 
remain faithful to the bridegroom. And in this way one who constrains 
his intellect to believe that Christ is God and man, savior etc. is 
considered to be a member of the church. Hence, according to 
Augustine in On the Creed, man is constituted of spirit, soul, and body, 
in the image of the Trinity.° But the spirit, as the higher, nobler, and 
more elevated part of the intellect, represents the figure of the Father, 
and the body, the person of the Son, and the soul, participating as it 
were in the nature of both [and] proceeding from each, represents the 
person of the Holy Spirit. 
24. And so the man who subdues his intellectual spirit and believes 
that Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, is said to be a member 
of the church even if the spirit has not yet subjected the soul to itself 
nor through the soul the body. Hence for a man to be a faithful image 
of the divine Trinity, [and] to achieve that vital concordance his spirit 
must be perfected through faith, hope, and charity, and joined to the 
Holy Spirit as its life and truth. His soul must be perfected so that it 
obeys the spirit which it often resists not by nature but because of a 
habit of sin so that “the animal nature of man does not perceive the 
things which come from the spirit of God.’ And so when the soul 
obeys the spirit and the spirit obeys Christ, there is no reason not to 
> Ecclesiastes 9:1. ere Gores. 
7St. Augustine, De fide et symbolo (PL 40, p. 193). 
16 


[PDF page 69]
Book I, para. 26 
hope that the body also will be restored to its own nature at the 
resurrection so that the whole spiritualized man will be united with 
God, as Augustine says above. 
25. Thus the church militant in that victory which is by faith, is like 
an army that acknowledges Christ, true God and true man, as its king 
and emperor, its life and truth, although while they do not think that 
anyone else can be king, not all the members obey his commands. 
And although faith without works is dead,* no member is cut off while 
his faith lasts, but there continues to be a connection like that with a 
withered member, [C.] 1 q. 1 [c. 47] Sicut urgeri and [C] 23 q. 7 [c. 4] 
Quemadmodum. Hence it is said that this church is a spotless bride in 
faith despite the fact that different terms are applied to it because of 
disobedience in soul and body of many — like a community which, 
because it has many good and many bad inhabitants is sometimes 
called totally good, sometimes totally bad, as Paul sometimes calls the 
Corinthians good and sometimes bad.’ Paul was a member of the 
church when he said: “‘With my mind I serve the law of God; with the 
flesh, the law of sin.”'® And because God alone is a searcher of hearts, 
no human judgment about the membership of the church is certain, 
except that concerning newly baptized infants. But with regard to 
adults there can be deception, — see Augustine, On the Correciion of the 
Donatists where he says that many only appear to be in the church." 
26. From this we conclude that the betrothal of Christ to the church 
militant and to any of its members is like an agreement by the 
emperor to marry the queen of France while she is queen and ruler of 
France, on condition that she work to get her kingdom to obey him 
and to convey it to her spouse — or otherwise the marriage will not 
take place. Then although the queen remains faithful to her pledge, 
the marriage does not take place because at some point she does not 
put down the resistance of the kingdom and bring it back to 
obedience when she could have done so. For her spouse did not 
oblige her to do the impossible but asked her to do what was difficult. 
And the same thing is true in general for the church militant. From 
here let us move to the explanation of the body described above, and 
consider its condition. 
8James 2:17. 91 Cor. 5:6 and 2 Cor. 2:8. 'ORomans 7:25. 
"St. Augustine, De correctione Donatistorum, ch. 7 (PL 33, p. 806). 


[PDF page 70]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
GEEMP ASRS 
DHE GHURGH TS COMPOSED OF BOTH GOOD AND 
EVIL MEMBERS. THE OFFIGIAL ACTIONS OF EVIL 
PERSONS SINCE THEY DEPEND ON THE OFFICE AND 
NO@ THE PERS ONFARE Stile ea Eis GRU AVP BAR: 
ALSO DISCUSSES THE SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATION 
OP DHE TRINEDY IN SOEs GE URC evil IAIN cial 
WELL AS THE RELATION OF SUBORDINATION 
AMONG THE CHURCH TRIUMPHANT, THE CHURCH 
SLEEPING, AND THE CHURCH MILITANT. MANY 
FINE AND NOTEWORTHY THINGS ARE SAID THERE. 
27. Furthermore since it is called a church [ecclesia] because it is a 
gathering together in unity and concord, the church is characterized 
by a spirit of fraternity which is the opposite of division or schism. It is 
joined together by a common belief, but an occasional difference of 
opinion if it is not held in a spirit of obstinacy is consistent with unity. 
For Cyprian and the whole council of seventy bishops differed from 
the faith of the Catholic church, but as Augustine states in Book 11 of 
his work, Against the Donatists,' they were not cut off from the church 
because they did not prefer their own opinion to fraternal unity and 
they were not obstinate about it. For it is very difficult to judge 
matters of faith. Ambrose writes in his 37th letter, Zo Constantius: “It 
is wise not to make rash judgments, especially in a matter of faith 
which is rarely perfect among men.”” Therefore the church militant 
since it can only make human judgments has many in the body of the 
church who do not appear from external indications to be unbelievers 
but are secretly in disagreement on the faith. They are not expelled or 
condemned, unless what has been hidden becomes known. And since 
such men do not corrupt the whole of the church militant if they are 
not known, what they do for the salvation and guidance of others is 
still valid.’ For since man is not obliged to the impossible, what is not 
known is rightly excused; and therefore the ministry of a secret 
heretic which one believes is being carried out properly in unity with 
'St. Augustine, De baptisma, contra Donatistas, 11, 6 (PL. 43, Pp. 130). 
St. Ambrose, Ad Constantium (PL. 16, p. 925). 
> This was denied by the Hussites, whose representatives came to Basel in January 1433. 
18 


[PDF page 71]
Book I, para. 29 
the church, while it injures the one who carries it out, does not 
adversely affect the recipient if he is rightly disposed and in com- 
munion with the church. This is Catholic doctrine which all believers 
hold and which Augustine discusses at length in Against the Letter of 
Parmenianus, Book u.* 
28. And so [Christ], the most perfect God and man and the 
mediator between God and men, so ordained it in a perfect and 
infallible command that, as Augustine writes in his letter 42, To 
Paulinus and as Ambrose wisely agrees in his letter 56, To Justus,” 
Christ is all that is to be sought after, the instrument of concord with 
God in whom alone all things exist. Therefore a bad minister does not 
do harm, for the Holy Spirit works through the appointed prelate, 
even if he is a false minister. Although he is not really a member in the 
church, he acts validly in evangelizing, consecrating, and regenerating 
to bring salvation to the recipient through his ministry, since it is not 
man but Christ who acts through the Holy Spirit and a human agent. 
This is the infallible truth which Augustine discusses in his work 
against Parmenianus, as quoted in C. 1 q.1 [c. 98] Per Ysaiam and in 
many other chapters [of the Decretum| including D. 19 [c. 8] 
Secundum. And Ambrose in the first book of On Penance writes that 
the priestly office receives its power from the Holy Spirit.° Now from 
this we conclude that those who only appear to be in the church 
militant can exercise a valid ministry for the salvation of the members 
of the church. 
29. And so from this point of view the church militant is composed 
of those who are true believing Catholics and those who only appear 
to be. Let us consider this last conception of the church more closely. 
Note how the church symbolizes the Trinity. For if it is considered 
from the point of view of divine judgment, only those who are united 
to God in love are in the church, and God alone knows them. If it is 
considered from the point of view of the judgment of the angels, then 
only all believers are members and the angelic spirits know the inner 
decision by which the intellect is converted to the faith. Indeed the 
faith is like a continuous spiritual line connecting all Christians to the 
Head. Therefore when this chord is struck in secret in a kind of 
*St. Augustine, Contra epistulam Parmeniani (PL 43, pp. 53-61). 
St. Augustine (and Alypius), Ad Paulinum (PL 33, p. 816), and St. Ambrose, Ad Justum 
(PL 16, p. 950). 
©St. Ambrose, De poenitentia, 1, 2 (PL 16, p. 950). 
IQ 


[PDF page 72]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
spiritual harmony, it is perceived by those angelic spirits and increases 
the joy of all the spirits in heaven. Human judgment is different. It 
presumes on the basis of outward human opinion that they are reborn 
in Christ until it is established otherwise by an external act or sign. 
For men hope that a good man will continue in the faith and they 
never would wish him to be disappointed in his hope of eternal glory, 
nor should they presume to make a judgment concerning matters 
which are hidden. Thus the church militant is like an army that 
carries the sign of the cross as its flag, an outward sign of its opposi- 
tion to the Anti-Christ, the adversary of Christ, — yet not all may 
possess the inward dispositions indicated by the external sign. 
30. And in this immortal army of Christ as in a single body a 
harmonious unity of true and presumed faith requires differing 
grades — a subject on which more should be said. And we ought at 
least to allude briefly to the things that are relevant to our purpose, 
although since they are most profound they could perhaps be more 
fruitfully discussed in greater detail than our purpose here may 
require. To explain the continual concord between the one groom 
and the one bride, we must first consider that the whole church is one 
in three, i.e., it is a church triumphant, sleeping, and militant. The 
church militant occupies the lowest position. Just as the lowest hier- 
archical rank in the church triumphant is passively enlightened 
without communicating further because the influence terminates 
there, while the middle rank is enlightened and enlightens and the 
highest rank [only] enlightens, so the church militant is the point at 
which the influence terminates, and the church sleeping is in the 
middle, and the church triumphant is the highest. This is a marvelous 
continuity through disparate intermediaries, since the whole church 
sleeping is subordinate to the church triumphant, the higher part of 
the church sleeping is immediately subordinate to the lowest part of 
the church triumphant, and the higher part of the church militant is 
subordinate to the lowest part of the church sleeping. The whole of 
the church sleeping is made up of those predestined [for salvation] 
but the membership of the church militant is always in doubt until it 
joins the church sleeping and triumphant. The passage from the 
church militant occurs in such a way, that not everyone enters the 
church triumphant by way of the church sleeping, but many do so 
without going through the church sleeping, since they do not need to 
be purified [in purgatory]. Hence the [pattern of] harmony in the 
20 


[PDF page 73]
Book I, para. 31 
church sleeping cannot be examined although it is not without its 
proper order which is directed toward the church on high. 
31. And because Christ is all things, as noted above, the church is 
fundamentally made up of God, the angels, and those men who are 
united through Christ to God. The church sleeping is considered as 
in an intermediate position between angels and men. It is a reflection 
of that of the angels, and the church militant is a reflection of the 
church sleeping, although the church sleeping is like the human 
church on earth in being directed toward the church triumphant. 
Thus on this point the church sleeping should be considered as 
linked to the church militant because the souls that are henceforth to 
be among the blessed are exiled in purgatory — although they cannot 
earn merit, while those on earth can still perform meritorious acts.’ 
However, among the wayfarers [to heaven] the members of the 
church sleeping come first for “death has been caught up into vic- 
tory”’® and they are certain of their reward. Therefore with firm and 
undoubting hope they are spiritualized in accord with their merits 
ahead of the militant below who proceed in a state of doubt with gross 
bodies as shadows as it were [of those above]. Although since they 
have not been purified so as to be able to enter heaven, all of the 
members of the church sleeping are below the lowest ranks of the 
church triumphant, in the whole gradation of those on pilgrimage [to 
heaven] there is no order of ascent which requires that one rise 
through the ranks from the lowest members of the church militant 
through the church sleeping and be placed on the last level of the 
church triumphant. The ascent to union with the true Head is swift or 
tardy, high or low, according to the degree of one’s inner adherence 
[to God] which is based on the merit or demerit which is earned by 
the inherent free will of the individual, so that anyone has equal 
access to the means through which he can become an adopted son of 
God, just as someone can rise on the basis of merit from the lowest 
grade of the clergy or laity to a ruling post as duke or archbishop or 
higher without [passing through] the intermediate ranks. But let us 
end this discussion so that we may turn our attention to the church 
considered as composed of living men. 
7On the development of the theology of purgatory, see Jacques LeGoff, The Birth of 
Purgatory, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984. 
em Corsnses4 
21 


[PDF page 74]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
CHAPTER VI 
THE CHURCH TRIUMPHANT UNITES GOD, THE 
ANGELS, AND THE HOLY SOULS. THE CHURCH 
MILITANT FOLLOWS THE MODEL OF THE CHURCH 
TRIUMPHANT BECAUSE IT IS MADE UP OF 
SACRAMENTS, PRIESTHOOD, AND CATHOLIC 
PEOPLE. THE SACRAMENTS ARE SUBJECT TO GOD, 
THE PRIESTHOOD TO HIS MINISTERS, THE ANGELS, 
AND THE PEOPLE TO THE BLESSED SOULS. THE 
CHAPTER ALSO DISCUSSES THE RELATION OF 
SUBORDINATION BY WHICH THE PRIESTHOOD IS 
JOINED TO CHRIST THROUGH THE SACRAMENTS 
WHICH ARE LINKED TO GOD, AND THE PEOPLE 
COME TO THE SACRAMENTS THROUGH THE 
PRIESTHOOD, AS WELL AS THE GRADATIONS IN 
EACH PART. IN ANY PART THE HIGHEST MEMBER 
INCLUDES ALL THE LOWER MEMBERS REPRESENTED 
IN HIMSELF. THIS IS A MOST IMPORTANT CHAPTER. 
32. We should examine the way in which the concordance in the 
body of the church signifies the Trinity since three great orders are 
found to be marvelously linked to a single head, Christ. First, the 
sacraments are subordinated to the divine concordance of Trinity and 
Unity. Secondly, the holy priesthood is subordinated to the divine 
concordance of the angels, the ministers of the Holy Trinity, since the 
priests are the ministers of the sacraments. Thirdly, the faithful on 
pilgrimage on earth are subordinated to the blessed spirits in heaven. 
The sacraments enlighten and purify, the pastoral priesthood purifies 
and is purified, and the faithful are purified and do not purify. All are 
arranged in harmonious order on the model of the threefold order 
among the angels, and through them of the Divine Trinity. In the 
admirable hierarchy of the sacraments, Christ as the Head communi- 
cates himself to all beings in this life through symbols and as a 
mystery in conformity with our mortal life, just as he communicates 
himself face to face without concealment! to the church triumphant, 
for this is what is proper to the capacity of each state. 
"r Cor. 13:12. The entire chapter is strongly influenced by Dionysius, the Areopagite, On 
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy (see Pseudo-Dionysius, The Complete Works, New York: Paulist 
Press, 1987). 
22 


[PDF page 75]
Book I, para. 34 
33. And so the sacraments are communicated by God in a hier- 
archical order, for there are so many sacraments that Augustine says 
writing to Volusian, “It would take too long to discuss adequately the 
various signs that are called sacraments when they relate to the 
divine.”” The sacraments thus divinely imparted for our salvation, 
since they are directed ultimately to the one Christ, possess a holy 
concordant order up to the highest sacrament, the Eucharist, just as 
in the church triumphant every rank is directed in a marvelous 
harmony to Christ, the head, in whom the whole court [of heaven] 
rests eternally in God. Thus in the sacrament of the one head, Christ, 
all other sacraments achieve their goal since he is the “sacrament of 
sacraments.’? Also every sacrament symbolizes the Trinity since in 
each there is the sacrament itself, what it signifies, and the thing 
signified together with the sacrament. Who can investigate fully the 
sweet concordance from the lowest sign to the highest sacrament 
down through the intermediate ones and within any particular sacra- 
ment? No one with certainty. Let it suffice therefore to have touched 
on these few points. 
34. The rank of priests follows. It is characterized by its power to 
administer the sacraments so that there is a continuity in the whole 
church without any intervening break. The priesthood thus wears an 
indelible sacramental sign of its harmonious ordering towards divine 
things above. And in this priesthood there is a hierarchical order from 
the highest pontiff down to the laity, which Dionysius the Great 
describes in his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy.* And as man is made up of 
spirit, soul, and body, so the sacraments are the one spirit of this body 
of the church, the priesthood the soul, and the faithful like the body. 
For as the soul adheres partly to the body and partly to the spirit and 
is the intermediary through which the spirit flows into the body, so the 
priesthood acts on the faithful. Therefore the priesthood is like a 
single soul in the one body of the faithful. Hence Gregory Nazianzen 
in the beginning of his Oratio Apologetica when he discusses how the 
body of the church is made up of the rulers and the ruled says: “He 
assigned others as pastors and teachers for the perfection of the 
church — those who because of their outstanding virtue are closer to 
God. They carry out the function in the church that the soul carries 
St. Augustine, 4d Marcellum (PL. 33, p- 527). 
3 Dionysius, The Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, ch. 3, para. 1. 
* Dionysius, The Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, chs. 5-7. 
23 


[PDF page 76]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
out in the body or the mind and reason in the soul. What is insuffi- 
cient or in excess among the various members is harmonized by the 
spirit as a perfectly integrated body adapted for all purposes and 
worthy to have Christ as its head.””* Ruling, life-giving, and illuminat- 
ive power is given to the priesthood because it is the light of the world 
and the salt of the earth.° Hence as Cyprian says in his letter On the 
Dice-Player (De Aleatore) priests are called the salt of the earth since 
they distribute to the whole brotherhood the salt of heavenly wisdom.’ 
35. There are hierarchical ranks in the priesthood as to responsi- 
bility for government and rule. For although all members of the 
highest rank in the hierarchy, the bishops, are equal as to orders and 
their priestly office, nevertheless there is a graded differentiation as to 
governing responsibility. In this government the hierarchy exhibits a 
certain concordance of one and many. “For there is only one episco- 
pate in which each has a part,” and a differential order with respect to 
responsibility for ruling. “All the other apostles assuredly participated 
in the same fellowship of honor and power as Peter,” but Peter was 
set over the others so that there might be a unity in concordance, as 
Cyprian argues, writing to Novatian.* And Jerome writing Against 
Jovinian says that among equal apostles Peter was chosen to preside 
so that with an established head there would be no possibility of 
schism.” 
36. Hence just as there is one episcopate, so there is one cathedra 
[lit. - chair] and one rule established in hierarchical grades. On this 
unity of the cathedra, Optatus of Milevis in Book 11 of his work Against 
Parmenianus (against whom he wrote seven small books) argues in 
elegant fashion that all Catholic bishops must occupy a single 
cathedra.'° And because this rulership was instituted by Christ, the 
head, to avoid schism and to preserve the unity and peace of the 
faithful, it is hierarchically organized in a way analogous to temporal 
governments. Thus Jerome observes that a presiding bishop is 
established in the same way as a captain is chosen in an army to act as 
> Gregory Nazianzen, Oratio 2, Apologetica, ch. 3 (PG 35, p. 410). 
® Matthew 5:13-14. 
’Cyprian, De aleatore, 2 (PL 4, p. 903) — not written by Cyprian. 
“Cyprian, De unitate ecclesiae, 5 and 4 (PL 4, p. 515); Ad Antonianum (PL 3, p. 815). 
St. Jerome, Adversus Jovinianum, 1, 26 (PL 23, p. 258). 
'"St. Optatus of Milevis, De schismate Donatistorum, u, 2 (PL 11, Pp. 947). St. Optatus was 
was a fourth century bishop who opposed the Donatist heresy and influenced St. 
Augustine. 
24 


[PDF page 77]
Book I, para. 38 
a ruling public official with the consent of all, D. 93 [c. 24] Legimus. 
Therefore “as the commonwealth is the common concern of the 
people, and the common concern is the concern of the state [civitas] 
and a state is a body of men united in any bond of agreement” as 
Augustine writes to Volusian in On Changes in the Divine Laws'' so 
one who rules as a pastor follows the example of one to whom the 
commonwealth is entrusted. Hence all who are under his care are 
understood to be united in the ruler as the body is united with the one 
soul which gives it life. 
37. Hence those united to the pastor constitute the church, as 
Cyprian writes in elegant fashion to Florentius Pupianus; part of 
which is included in C. 7 q. 1 [c. 7] Scire debes, where he says, “These, 
they say, are the church: the people united to their priest and the flock 
following its shepherd. And you know that a bishop is in his church 
and the church in its bishop. And if anyone is not with his bishop, he 
is not in the church.”!’ Cyprian says the same thing in his letter to 
Cornelius, On the Five Priests, “Hence as the universal church is the 
Mystical Body of Christ, so particular churches are the mystical 
bodies of their heads who act in place of Christ.”'’ Thus Pope 
Anastasius when he writes to John of Jerusalem against Rufinus, 
speaks of the Roman church as follows: “It will be my concern to 
guard the faith of the Gospel among my people, and to keep together 
the parts of my body in various places on earth with whatever letters | 
can, so that no profane interpretation may creep in which might 
attempt to disturb the minds of the devout.”'* And this agrees with D. 
19 [c. 7] /ta dominus. Our basic point is that the church is united in the 
bishop. And so the bishop symbolizes and represents them [the mem- 
bers of the church] because for that collectivity he is a public person. 
And this will be useful in later discussions. 
38. But there is a gradation [among the bishops] as Leo IX men- 
tions in his letter to two African bishops, when he says: “There is one 
order of bishops, although some are set over others whether from the 
fact that they are located in capital cities and those that are more 
famous in power or secular law, or because they have some special 
privilege from the holy fathers as an indication of their worth. Just as 
"St. Augustine, 4d Marcellinum (PL 33, p. 529). 
'2St. Cyprian, Ad Florentium pupianum (PL 33, p. 529). 
'3St. Cyprian, Ad Cornelium (PL. 3, p. 821). 
'+ Pope Anastasius I, Ad Joannem (PL 20, p. 72). 
25 


[PDF page 78]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
every earthly power is different from every other in rank, that is, 
Augustus or the emperor may be first, then the Caesars, then kings, 
dukes, and counts and tribunes, so according to the holy fathers 
ecclesiastical power is hierarchically ordered. As blessed Clement 
says: ‘In those cities in which there once were high priests and leading 
doctors of the law among the pagans, primates and patriarchs have 
been established who have the right to pass judgment on the rest and 
carry out the more important business of not one but several prov- 
inces.” Thus where there were archpriests among the pagans, 
Christian archbishops have been established to head individual prov- 
inces. Where there was a metropolis — which is translated as a ‘mother 
city’ — there were metropolitans who ruled over the greater mother 
city of three or four cities in a province. Hence sometimes these are 
simply called metropolitans, and elsewhere archbishops if there were 
no higher officers in that province. In lesser important cities which 
had only priests or counts, bishops are established. And the tribunes 
of the people are correctly understood to be the equivalents of priests 
or other clerics of lower rank. The Roman pontiff has been set over 
all of these by divine and human law.”'* This is also the opinion of 
[Popes] Anacletus, Clement, Anytus, Julius, and of other Roman 
pontiffs. 
39. And this argumentation is to be noted well for it demonstrates 
that church government was added to the temporal power as the soul 
to the body so that where there was temporal rule and earthly govern- 
ment, a Christ-directed rulership was added to lead all things in 
peace and harmony in the appropriate way to the one Head of highest 
power. It remains to give fuller consideration elsewhere to what has 
been said. Now let us touch on certain fundamentals, and then 
specifically on the subject of the priesthood. 
'S Pope Leo IX, Ad Petrum et Joannem Episcopos (PL 143, p- 730)- 
26 


[PDF page 79]
Book I, para. 41 
CHAP AE RAVAN 
THE ECCLESIASTICAL HIERARCHY HAS ORDERS AND 
RANKS LIKE HOSE ORME ANGELS. DALS US 
PROVEN BY EXAMPLES AND INTERMIXTURE. 
40. Earlier when we were discussing the hierarchic orders and 
choirs we said that just as in the hierarchy as a whole there is a 
highest, intermediate, and lowest rank, in the highest part of each 
created hierarchy there are also different ranks up to the one that is 
first in rank. Just as there are three orders in the angelic hierarchy, so 
also in the first order again there are three choirs. And although there 
is a gradation in this manner in any choir, | now wish to show that a 
continuous ordered relationship of concordance is found throughout 
the whole hierarchy. In the last choir of the first order the illumination 
carried out in the first order remains within it without being com- 
municated, so that its influence ends there. Yet that choir is still 
connected with the upper part of the succeeding first choir of the 
second order so that without communicating the radiance belonging 
to the first order, it actually communicates a radiance sufficient for 
the second order so that there is an unbroken sweet melody in a 
continuous hierarchical order. On this basis, let us imagine that the 
first order has 21 degrees of spiritual illumination which act there and 
are more than are necessary for the first choir. The first choir 
attempts to share these with the second choir but cannot wholly do so. 
Thus the second choir receives only 20. And that choir cannot com- 
municate the totality of what it has received, and hence it communi- 
cates 19. And because the order consists of three degrees of light, the 
lowest choir in that rank cannot communicate them further and 
therefore it remains purely passive as far as that order is concerned. 
Hence the 18 degrees which it can communicate pass down to the 
next lower order and thus successively down to the last choir of the 
third order which will have twelve. 
41. And from this we may conclude that since God is infinite light, 
every light outside of God, being created and finite when it is com- 
pared to God, is considered reflection of the Infinite Light. And the 
more distant it is from God, the darker it is, although in heaven the 
eternal divine Light embraces every spirit with a radiance that com- 
27 


[PDF page 80]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
pletely fulfills the desire of each. Thus returning to our argument, in 
the orders of religion and that part of the church which is considered 
more spiritual there are nine choirs from that of bishops down to that 
of monks. The highest order consists of the bishop, priests, and 
deacons, all consecrated. The intermediate order is made up of the 
subdeacons, acolytes, and exorcists, who are mixed. The lowest are 
the readers, the porters, and the tonsured, who are not consecrated. 
Likewise the order of deacons, subdeacons, and acolytes possesses 
comparatively more holiness because it contains two consecrated 
choirs. Again the order of the priests, deacons, and subdeacons is 
consecrated but extends below the first order. And so with other 
mixtures. But monks are linked to the tonsured choir, since they are 
midway between the laity and the clergy. 
GHAPTER VIII 
DHE PRIS iH OO DRS Ar RUN Tai Ne Oirs ORDER Sis 
GOVERNING POWER, AND CATHEDRA WHICH ARE 
LTS sSPIRTo SS OWL AND BODY] As INTORDERS SiO 
ALSO IN GOVERNING POWER AND CATHEDRA, 
THERE IS A HIERARCHICAL GRADATION. THE 
CHARTER ALSO DISCUSSES SHE HOLINESS SOR Dt HE 
PRIESTHOOD. 
42. Similarly, in accordance with what appears above, the ruling 
power that is the basis of government and pastoral care is divided into 
orders. The first order is made up of the pope, the patriarchs, and the 
archbishops; the second order, of the bishops, archdeacons, and 
deans; the third, of priests, deacons, and subdeacons. And they have 
mixed gradations and subordinate connections among themselves. 
D. 89 [c. 7] Ad hoc tells us that as in the case of the heavenly ranks, 
such a diversity of grades must work to preserve the whole so that a 
great differentiated order is maintained. Also on the subject of the 
unity of the whole cathedra' it should be noted that the whole priest- 
' Cathedra — literally, the chair or throne of a bishop. It symbolizes the bishop’s teaching 
authority. The First Vatican Council (1870-71) declared that the pope is infallible when 
speaking on faith and morals, ex cathedra, that is, in his official teaching capacity. 
28 


[PDF page 81]
Book I, para. 43 
hood constitutes the church as one body, and the orders of the 
priesthood are like its soul and the Holy Spirit is its spirit, so that the 
priesthood in the church is made up of body, soul, and spirit. And 
because the Holy Spirit performs the actions of the priests through 
the imprint [character] received at ordination, the priesthood is holy. 
That the Holy Spirit works through the priest has already been shown 
above by Augustine in Book 1 of Against the Letter of Parmenianus,’ 
and by Albertus Magnus discussing the creed in his work, On the 
Sacrifice of the Mass,* and by others, nearly all of them doctors. 
43. Therefore although many priests may become schismatics and 
heretics now and in the future, the words of Christ remain true that 
promised that the holy priesthood would remain in him and he in it 
until the end of the world. Hence the body of the priesthood, 
although it is weak and mortal and subject to error in its members, is 
still not (so) as a whole since the majority always remains in the faith 
and law of Christ, as Cyprian concludes in his letter to Novatian 
where he says: “Although every man is a liar, God is still truthful. 
Hence the greater and better part of the confessors stand firm in the 
faith and the truth of the Lord’s law and teaching.” And as “the 
worthiness of the other apostles was not diminished by the fall of 
Judas, so also the other priests do not lose their worth on account of 
the departure of some priests from the faith.”* From this I deduce a 
proposition which is not unimportant for our purpose that the 
majority of the priests always remains in the [true] faith and law. And 
this is an additional important basis for what follows. 
See chapter 5. 
3 Albertus Magnus, De sacrificio missae, 1, 9 (Alberti Magni, Opera omnia, ed. A. Bourgnet, 
Paris, 1890, 38, pp. 64 ff.) 
*St. Cyprian, On the Unity of the Church, trans. Roy J. Deferrari, Washington, D.C.; The 
Fathers of the Church, ch. 22 (p. 177). 
29 


[PDF page 82]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
CHAPTER IX 
IN THE SAME WAY THAT THE PRIESTHOOD IS 
SUBORDINATED TO GOD, THE POWER TO GOVERN IS 
UNDER THE ANGELES. THROUGH THE GATRED RA 
THE PRIESTHOOD IS LINKED TO THE ANGEL WHO IS 
SET OVER A CHURCH TO GUARANTEE THE PRUTH 
OF THAT CATHEDRA. THIS IS AN EXCELLENT 
CHAPTER. 
44. Next we should consider that [church] rulership is characterized 
by its angelic spirit, its cathedra, and its body. Just as the sacerdotal 
power draws its strength from the Trinity itself and is directed by the 
Holy Spirit through the imprint of orders because the priesthood is 
subordinated to the Highest Priest and the Supreme Divine Con- 
cordance, so the [ecclesiastical] rulership, which flows from the 
priesthood in a descending and comparative fashion as it governs the 
faithful, is subordinated to the hierarchy of the angels and the priest- 
hood is connected to the power of the angels by means of the cathedra. 
Now it is clear from the Apocalypse that angels preside over and are 
put in charge of churches.' Catholic doctors also hold that they are set 
over the commonwealth and principalities, since the angel said to 
Daniel: “I have come because of your words. But the prince of the 
Persians resisted me for 21 days. And behold, Michael, one of the 
first princes [of the angels] came to my aid.” and a little later: ““Now I 
shall return to do battle with the prince of the Persians. For when I 
was leaving, the prince of the Greeks appeared.””? And St. Gregory 
says: “What shall we call the princes of the other nations but angels? 
Among the mysteries to be taught concerning the angels is the fact 
that angels are placed over each individual nation and different ones 
for the same people. For the angel that spoke to Daniel was placed 
over the Jewish people who were in captivity in Persia and Michael 
over the other Jews not in captivity.”* 
45. And from this it is evident that this holy guardianship is 
exercised by the angelic spirits through the cathedra. Hence in its 
' Apocalypse (Revelation) 2:1. 
? Daniel 10:13 and 20. 
Pope Gregory I, Expositio veteris et Novi Testamenti, v1, 9 (PL 79, p. 1001). 
30 


[PDF page 83]
Book I, para. 46 
power to rule, the priesthood has the soul of its rulership in the 
cathedra, and its spirit in an angel, on the model of the example above. 
From this we conclude that although pernicious persons often may sit 
in the episcopal chairs [cathedris] the truth taught by the ruling 
cathedra is infallible for this reason — as Augustine declares when he 
discusses the words of Christ “In the chair of Moses ...” in On the 
Correction of the Donatists.* And from this comes another fundamental 
proposition for our work — that the truth adheres to the cathedra. 
*St. Augustine, Contra litteras Petiliani Donatistae, u, 61 (PL 43, p. 304), on Matthew 
23:2. 
GRAPE REX 
THE EFFICACY OF THE POWER OF INTERCESSION OF 
THE PRIEST IS AIDED BY THE INTERCESSION OF 
THE BLESSED IN HEAVEN. AN EPILOGUE ALSO 
SHOWS THAT TRUE PRIESTHOOD IS BASED ON A 
THREEFOLD CONCORDANCE IN HEAVEN — WITH 
THE DIVINE THROUGH ORDERS, WITH THE ANGELS 
THROUGH THE CATHEDRA, AND WITH THE BLESSED 
IN HEAVEN THROUGH THE [PRIESTLY] OFFICE. 
THUS THE PRIESTHOOD IS ONE SOUL IN THE ONE 
BODY OF THE FAITHFUL. THIS LITTLE CHAPTER IS 
TO BE KEPT VERY MUCH IN MIND, ESPECIALLY THE 
CONCLUSIONS AT THE END. 
46. Thirdly, we shall consider the priesthood in its function as 
intercessor, which derives from a combination of orders and govern- 
ing power. For this purpose it is subordinated to the blessed spirits in 
heaven who offer up the copious prayers, which have come from the 
[priestly] office which has orders and governing power, on behalf of 
those for whom they have been said. The actions so aided are 
accepted because of the holiness of the office, even though the person 
who offers it may not be acceptable. The basic point to be considered 
here is that the prayer of the priest is more acceptable because by 
virtue of the priestly office it is continued by the saints in heaven and 
31 


[PDF page 84]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
reaches Christ who is Truth. And this should be noted. Hostiensis 
speaks of it in his Summa de remissione towards the end: “The church 
is one. Part of it is the church militant on earth and another part is the 
church triumphant in heaven. And the whole church wishes devout 
souls to be helped, De penitentia [De consecratione| D. 1, [c. 55] Hi 
duo.” And in the same place he notes that “there are three things in 
the church which always retain their efficacy, however sinful the one 
who performs them — the power of the words, the power of the 
sacraments, and the desire of the church, [C.] 15, final qu. [8] final c. 
[5]; 13 q. 2 [c. 21] Pro obeuntibus. For God is moved by the supplica- 
tion of the church triumphant and the petitions of the church 
militant.”! 
47. We now can describe the way in which the true priesthood is 
based on a threefold concordance with heaven. It is related to the 
divine through orders so that Gregory Nazianzen says in his Oratio 
Apologetica that the sacred mysteries are celebrated on earth following 
the model of those in heaven, and through them, although still on 
earth, we are associated with the orders in heaven.’ It is related to the 
angels through the cathedra and to the blessed in heaven through the 
office. And so the priesthood is like one soul in the body of the faithful 
which communicates life, growth, and sensation to its members. A 
ranking is assigned to a presiding see [cathedra] on the basis of the 
rank of its members. But the hierarchical grades of the body [of the 
church] are arranged on the basis of the ranks of earthly government 
at the head of which is the Roman republic. From the above it is easy 
to deduce the divisions into orders and choirs of the earthly hierarch- 
ies of the body [of the church]. Hence I now pass over this for reasons 
of space since | will discuss it in Book m1. 
48. And the only thing to be kept in mind is this. As the soul in the 
head is compared to the pontiff in the city of Rome, the highest- 
ranking commonwealth in the world, so dwelling in the other mem- 
bers on a similar hierarchical basis it represents the other bishops 
according to their rank, as Leo IX notes above.’ And let it suffice for 
now to know that, as Cyprian says to Rogatian, “There is one church 
in the whole world divided into many members, and one episcopate 
divided into many bishoprics in a harmonious plurality.” And, 
'Hostiensis, Summa aurea de remissionibus, Lyons, 1537, p. 289a. 
* Gregory Nazianzen, Oratio 2 Apologetica, c. 75 (PG 351, p. 482). 
3See no. 38 above. 
32 


[PDF page 85]
Book I, para. 50 
“whoever is not in the church is far from Christ, the life and the 
truth,” as he says.* 
49. After the above, we should examine the words of Christ that are 
to be applied to the church and to the successors of the apostles so as 
to establish in this way the basis of ecclesiastical power. 
*St. Cyprian, Ad Antonianum, ch. 24 (PL 3, p- 815). 
CHAP TERS 
NEXT WE SHOULD INVESTIGATE THE WORDS OF 
GHRIST THAT REFER RO LHE CHURCH AND THE 
SUCCESSORS OF THE APOSTLES IN ORDER TO FIND 
IN THEM DHE BASTS FOR THE POWER OF THE 
CHURGH= FIRST.VCHRIST OFTEN SATD: DHINGS TO 
HISTAROSTUES HAT APPLIED NOT TO THEM BUD 
TO THEIR SUGGESSORS, ORTEN HE WISHED TO 
DIREGD HIS WORDS TO THE CHURGH AStAG DUAL Iny 
GATHERED TOGETHER, AND SOMETIMES AS STILL 
DISPERSED. PETER’S ROLE AS A REPRESENTATIVE 
OF THE CHURCH IS DISCUSSEDVAND! THE ERTTER 
OF ALY PUGS Se AUiGUSTINE SAND PORTUNAD Us ES 
QUOTED WHICH HAS POINTS WORTH NOTING. 
50. Now we should see what we can conclude from the sound 
fundamental principles set forth above, in order to know the answers 
to questions which can arise in the church. First let us note the 
opinion of Augustine [writing] to Hesychius, On the End of the World 
concerning the words that Christ spoke to the apostles. He says that 
the words that Christ spoke to the apostles are to be understood as 
applying to their successors — words such as the following: “All 
nations will hate you for my name’s sake.” And the following: “You 
will be witnesses in Judea and Samaria and even to the ends of the 
earth,” and the following: “Behold I am with you all days even to the 
consummation of the world.” Everyone knows that he made these 
promises to the whole church which would exist, with some dying and 
others being born, until the end of the world. “And thus he says to 
33 


[PDF page 86]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
them (it does not wholly apply to them, and nevertheless it is said as if 
it applied to them alone): ‘When you shall see the abomination’ etc. 
and ‘When you see this, know’ etc.””' 
51. From this we must conclude that the words that Christ spoke to 
the apostles are to be applied to the church. And on this it should be 
noted that sometimes Christ wished to reveal mysteries to the church 
as a single united body, and sometimes as dispersed in the world. 
Because Peter was the oldest of the apostles and he had placed him 
over the apostles to avoid schism and preserve peace, as Jerome says 
in his first book against Jovinian,’ Christ often spoke to Peter, the 
chief of the apostles, as the ruler who symbolized and represented the 
unity of the whole church which had been committed to him. For 
there is no doubt that the whole church has the power of the keys, to 
bind and loose, as long as it is united, but we find that Christ only 
granted that power when he said to Peter: “I shall give thee the keys,” 
and “‘Whatever thou shalt loose etc.”’ Augustine discusses this in the 
22nd chapter of The Christian Combat along with the saying of Christ, 
“Peter, | have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not,” and the follow- 
ing: “The gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.”* Hence, because 
as Ambrose says in D. 50 [c. 54] Fidelior, Peter was called a rock 
because of the strength of the church and “because he first 
established the foundation of the faith among the nations and like a 
steadfast rock was to uphold the whole structure of the work of 
Christ,” Christ when he wished to speak about the church spoke to 
him as one who stood for it. Therefore we should draw the firm 
privileges of the church from what Christ granted, promised, and said 
to Peter. 
52. And to touch on another matter, let us note the letter which 
Alypius, Augustine, and Fortunatus wrote to Generosus which says: 
“The Gospel has been preached to you by the voice of Jesus Christ 
himself because his ‘Gospel will be preached to all nations, and then 
the end will come.’ The Gospel has been preached to you through the 
prophets and the letters of the apostles that a promise was made to 
Abraham and to his seed, Christ, when God said: ‘In thy seed shall all 
'St. Augustine, Ad Hesychium (PL 33, p. 923). 
*St. Jerome, Contra Jovinianum, i, 26 (PL 23, p- 258). 
3 Matthew 16:19. 
*St. Augustine, De Agone Christiano, ch. 30 (PL 40, p. 308) on Luke 22:32 and Matthew 
61:18. 
34 


[PDF page 87]
Book I, para. 53 
nations . . . be blessed.” Therefore if an angel from heaven should say 
to you as you keep these promises: ‘Give up universal Christianity and 
take the side of Donatus . . .” he should be anathema for he would be 
trying to cut you off from the whole, to lead you astray, and to separate 
you from the things which have been promised by God. For if the 
succession of bishops is important, how much more true and useful is 
it to count from Peter himself to whom, as representative of the whole 
church, the Lord said: ‘Upon this rock I will build my church, and the 
gates of hell will not prevail against it?? Linus succeeded Peter, 
Cletus, Linus, etc., and Miltiades, Eusebius ... But in the sucession 
which goes from Peter to [Pope] Anastasius who today sits in the same 
chair [cathedra| even if some traitor might have been led astray in that 
period, there is nothing that can hurt the church and innocent 
Christians. The Lord foreseeing this says about bad rulers: ‘What 
they say do, what they do, do not do: for they say things and do not do 
them.’ And thus he made certain that the hope of the faithful, being 
‘placed not in man but in God, would never be shaken by the storm of 
sacrilegious schism.”° 
> Augustine, Fortunatus, and Alypius, 4d Generosum (PL 33, p. 196ff.). 
CACAUP LE RESCh I 
EXGELLENT TEAGHING ON OTHER SUBJEGTS MAY 
BPD RI WINSE RO Mem ED Ad sb hii Re Bb GEL Aran ER 
ALS OPDISGUSS Es THE SPREAD OR THE GHUR CEH 
THROW GHSLEE WORDED BE DORE DEH Ess.» GON D 
COMING OF THE LORD AND THE MEANING OF HIS 
COMING IN THE CLOUDS OF HEAVEN. 
53. Excellent teaching is contained in the aforesaid letter. In the 
first place it demonstrates that the true church is the one that is 
universal and spread everywhere, and that it will extend throughout 
the whole world before the day of judgment. Augustine also discusses 
this at great length in the letter To Hesychius, On the Last Day. 
Therefore, although the day of judgment will not come before the 
'St. Augustine, Ad Hesychium (PL 33, pp. go8ff.). 
35 


[PDF page 88]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
Anti-Christ has appeared and the saints, such as Cyprian and Lactan- 
tius, wrote a variety of things about the end of the world and the 
coming of the Anti-Christ, and Cyprian even believed that he would 
come very soon in his own time, as he wrote in two letters to 
Demetrian and Fortunatus,” nevertheless, whether Christ will come 
earlier or whether the world will last for seven thousand years as 
Lactantius seems to hold in the seventh book of his /nstitutes’ or when 
this will happen is completely uncertain. For Christ said to the apos- 
tles who were the church, “It is not for you to know the times and the 
moments that God has established in His power.’’* Nevertheless 
according to St. Jerome’s letter to Algazias, last question, we know 
from the [letter of the] Apostle [Paul] to the Thessalonians that first 
the whole Roman empire must be destroyed and all its subjects 
withdraw from it.° And similarly in the Gloss on those words of Paul 
many doctors say that before the coming of the Anti-Christ, there 
should also be a departure of the clergy from obedience to the Roman 
see. Hence in view of the present situation in the papacy and the 
empire, the wise man will conclude from this prophecy that there is 
not much time left. Nevertheless although today we see persecution 
and many of the evils that are to precede the end, we know that the 
end is not in the immediate future — although there may be signs of 
the end — because the name of the Lord and the church must be first 
spread throughout the whole world and all its islands. 
54. Hence when Augustine in his discussion speaks of the coming 
of Christ on high in a time of persecution, this is to be understood not 
in the superficial literal meaning of the day of judgment but in the 
more subtle interpretation of the coming of Christ to the church, that 
he will come “in the clouds of heaven” in the church with all his 
power in a time of great persecution, and “then he will send forth his 
angels and will gather the elect.” He writes in more detail on this in 
the aforesaid letter to Hesychius. Elsewhere in a little book which is 
an extensive investigation of truth and goodness, I have come to the 
conclusion that more than 600 years still remain and that in this time 
the world ought to be prepared for reform. O God, if only we could 
St. Cyprian, Ad Thiberitanos (PL 4, pp. 350ff.). 
3 Lactantius, /nstitutiones, vu, 4 (PL 6, p. 1085). 
*Acts/1:7; 
>St. Jerome, Ad Algaziam (PL 22, p. 1036) on 2 Thess. 2. 
©The book mentioned by Cusanus has been lost. 
36 


[PDF page 89]
Book I, para. 55 
lift up our heads at this time and see that our redemption is at hand, 
for we see that the church has never fallen as low as it now is. God 
grant that his elect may meet in the holy synod of Basel, and gathered 
there amid such adversity and perplexity, may manifest the coming of 
his majesty in the heavens. 
GEL ATP NE R&xennT 
DES PRUE SCAR MORICVGHURCGH TS INO TE LVL ED aN 
GEOGRAPHICAL EXTENSION. MATERNUS, THE 
BIS EVOP OP GOLOGNE, Is/ALSO MEN TIONED: 
55. And so this letter can set all doubts to rest, for it shows that the 
Catholic church and the true faith is the one that is least limited 
geographically and the most widely diffused throughout the world. 
Thus Optatus in the second book of his work, Against Parmenianus, 
tells how Eunomius and Olympius were sent from Rome by Pope 
Miltiades and by Maternus of Cologne, Reticius of Autun, Marinus 
of Arles, and ro other bishops and stayed at Carthage for forty days. 
There was fierce argument every day and the final decision was that 
the Catholic church was the one that was spread throughout the 
world.' On this Augustine, Cyprian, and the holy Fathers have left us 
many writings.’ And so from this we can conclude that since our faith 
today is in agreement with the faith that was spread throughout the 
world at that time, it must be true because the unvarying faith is one. 
Despite the fact that neither among the 205 bishops who dwelt in 
parts of Africa and signed the (African) conciliar decrees, nor in the 
East was there a single orthodox Christian [and] in spite of the many 
schisms and different heresies in our Christian faith, the one true 
faith is more widespread than any sect of the schismatics and heretics. 
And this argument alone is sufficient to defeat every wicked heresy. 
"St. Optatus of Milevis, De schismate Donatistorum, 1, 23 and 26 (PL 11, pp. 931 and 935). 
2St. Augustine, Ad Bonifacium; de correctione Donatistorum, (PL 33, p. 794, and 34, 
Pp. 509). 


[PDF page 90]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
CHAT DERE Vi 
THERE IS ONE TRUE AND CERTAIN CATHEDRA OF 
PETER WHICH IS THE CHAIR OF ALL HIS 
SUCCESSORS. A DISCUSSION FOLLOWS ON THE 
UNITY OF THE CHAIR [CATHEDRA| WHICH ALL 
CATHOLIC BISHOPS MUST OCCUPY, AND IT IS 
ASSERTED THAT THE POPE IS FIRST IN THAT 
CHAIR. HOW WE ARE TO UNDERSTAND THE 
STATEMENT THAT HE WHO DOES NOT ADHERE TO 
THE CHAIR OF PETER IS NOT A BELIEVER. THIS IS 
AN IMPORTANT CHAPTER. 
56. Next we affirm that Peter represented the church [when Christ 
promised] the gates of hell would not prevail against it. All the vener- 
able fathers held this opinion and gave their reasons for so doing. On 
this there is more below. We also affirm that the true and certain chair 
[cathedra| of Peter in which all his successors sit, is one. Hence, since 
the unity of the cathedra is the first privilege of the one church, 
according to Optatus, Against Parmenianus, Book u1,' it follows that 
whoever does not adhere to the unity of the cathedra is outside the 
unity of the church, see D. 93 [c. 3] Qui cathedram. In the same way 
Optatus says in the book mentioned above, “The cathedra is one. You 
cannot deny that you know that the episcopal chair [cathedra] in the 
city of Rome was granted first to Peter who occupied it as head of the 
apostles. This is also why he was called Cephas. In him the unity of 
the cathedra was not recognized by all so that no one could claim that 
any other apostle had a separate cathedra, since this would make 
anyone a schismatic who wished to set up an alternative to the one 
cathedra. Vhus there is a single cathedra which is first of the endow- 
ments [of the church]. Peter occupied it first; Linus succeeded him; 
Clement succeeded Linus; and then Anacletus etc. etc., and Siricius 
succeeded Damasus and he is our associate today.”” And below, ““We 
read that Peter, our prince, received the saving keys against the gates 
of hell when Christ said: ‘I shall give thee the keys . . .. Why therefore 
in your presumption and audacity do you strive to usurp the keys of 
'Optatus, Contra Parmenianum, u, 3-9 (PL 11, pp. 947-962). 
38 


[PDF page 91]
Book I, para. 57 
the kingdom for yourself by warring against the chair of Peter?” etc. 
“Therefore the cathedra is the first of the endowments of the church 
which we have proved is ours through Peter and it has an angel 
watching over it.” For the angel given to a church is not assigned to 
one that is not in union with the chair of Peter. And below: “I say that 
you are branches cut off from the vine, a stream cut off from its 
source. For a stream that is small and does not begin of itself must 
have a source and a tree cannot grow from a branch which has been 
cut off, for when it is cut off, it withers.” These are important exam- 
ples for there is but one cathedra by succession to Peter upon whom 
the church was founded, and we are certain that the gates of hell will 
not prevail against it. From this we should conclude that whoever says 
that he is a Christian must of necessity say that his chair is joined to 
the chair of the successors of St. Peter and is united in association 
with that chair. Otherwise he is not a Christian, see [C.] 24 q. 1 [c. 27] 
Quicumque etc. and [c. 33] Pudenda at the end, and the chapter headed 
Schisma [c. 34] and D. 93 [c. 3] Qui cathedram along with many similar 
passages. 
57. And so it is true that there is one chair of Peter, for the chair 
|cathedra| signifies the power to rule the church. And as the three first 
patriarchs, those of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, are said to have 
occupied that chair of Peter, the same is true of all the subordinate 
bishops along with them. Hence Pope St. Gregory in the rggth letter 
in the [Papal] Register says to Eulogius of Alexandria: ‘““Your most 
sweet Holiness has said many very pleasing things to me in your 
letters about the chair of St. Peter, the prince of the apostles, — 
observing that Peter still occupies it today through his successors — 
although I consider myself unworthy to be among those sitting in it, or 
even standing [near]. But everything that you have said on that subject 
I have freely accepted because the one who speaks to me of the chair 
[also] sits in the chair of Peter.” And below: “Therefore, although 
there are many apostles, only the head see of the apostles has been 
authoritative for government, a see that is one in three places. For he 
glorified one see [Rome] as the one where he deigned to remain and 
to end his life. He honored [another] see [Alexandria] when he sent it 
an evangelist, his disciple [Mark]. He confirmed [a third] see [Anti- 
och] by presiding there for seven years, although he was to leave it. 
Since therefore there is one see belonging to one man [Peter] over 
which by divine authority three bishops now preside, whatever good I 
oo 


[PDF page 92]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
hear from you | impute to myself. If you believe anything good of me 
impute it to yourself for we are one in him who says: “That all may be 
one as thou, Father, in me and I in thee, and these are one in us!’ ” 
And this letter is to be especially noted because three bishops sit as 
rulers in one chair of Peter, and of these the highest is the bishop of 
Rome. And as all bishops were joined to these sees at the time of the 
Council of Nicaea* and before, and after that time all bishops went 
out from them, so there is one cathedra for one episcopate made up of 
all the bishops, in which the Roman bishop sits in the first place. 
58. And again, although some popes such as Liberius, Honorius,* 
and others who sat for a time in the chair of Peter fell victims to the 
error of schism, the see remained unblemished. It should especially 
be kept in mind, I think, that it is a certain rule and secure strength 
that the sees which have been founded by the Roman see when they 
are united to it as its daughters are considered [part of] one see and 
cathedra, although certain pontiffs, both in the direct succession in a 
straight line from the Roman pontiffs and in collateral ones [from 
other bishops] have fallen into heresy. For the generations from 
Abraham to Christ are named by Matthew in succession, [and] 
although not all in the line were holy, it reached to Christ. So in the 
church, which this succession symbolizes, a straight line of pontiffs 
reaches to Christ despite the evil conduct of intermediate popes. For 
that line or holy cathedra will endure without defect even to the 
consummation of the world. Hence whoever thinks that he is in the 
Christian faith should observe the infallible rule of Cyprian that the 
majority always continues in the faith and true law, and whoever 
separates himself from it [the majority] separates himself from the 
church of the faithful. Hence Cyprian says to Florentius and 
Pupianus: “If certain ones have fallen away from the faith, has their 
unbelief disproved the fidelity of God? No! God tells the truth and 
every man is a liar. It is said in the Gospel that when his disciples left 
him as he was speaking, he turned to the Twelve and said: ‘Do you 
not also wish to go?’ Peter answered him saying: ‘Lord, to whom shall 
Pope Gregory I, Ad Eulogius (PL 77, pp. 898-899). 
*The Council of Nicaea (A.D. 325) is recognized as the first Ecumenical Council. It 
condemned the Arian heresy and adopted the Nicene Creed. 
*Pope Liberius (352-366) was forced by the emperor to subscribe to Arianism. Pope 
Honorius (625-638) was condemned by the Council of Constantinople for subscribing 
to the Monothelite heresy that asserted that Christ had only one will, rather than a 
human and a divine will. 
40 


[PDF page 93]
Book I, para. 60 
we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life. And we believe and know 
that Thou art the Son of the Living God.’ Peter upon whom the 
church had been founded, teaches in this passage that although the 
obstinate and proud multitude of those who do not wish to hear may 
depart, the church does not withdraw from Christ. And these are the 
church: the people united to the priest and the shepherd to his 
flock.’ 
59. This is correct doctrine, for Peter spoke in the name of the 
whole church as its representative. And still many fell away from the 
church; even among the apostles there was Judas. Therefore the true 
church of the faithful is made up of those who consider themselves to 
be in the faith of Christ and constitute a majority in union with their 
pastor and with Peter and his chair. Leaving this conclusion which is 
evident from the above, I will try to add a few more general observa- 
tions on this matter. For the passage in which Christ prayed that 
Peter’s faith would not fail® - and he was heeded because of his 
holiness — is explained as referring to the faith of the church. Others 
however, for instance, Albertus Magnus writing on the same passage, 
also understand it as indicating that the faith of Peter and his suc- 
cessors will not ultimately fail.’ Still others, as Gorra explains, under- 
stand it as referring to the faith of the Roman church.* 
*St. Cyprian, Ad Florentium Pupianum (PL 4, p. 418ff). 
®Luke 22:32. 
7 Albertus Magnus, Commentarius in Lucam, 22 (in A. Bourgnet (ed.), Alberti Magni, Opera 
omnia, XXII, p. 685). 
“Nicholas de Gorra, Commentaria in quattuor evangelia, Cologne, 1537, f. 456v. 
CSE Aa BRS Nay) 
DHE PRESIDING BISHOPS REPRESEN Tf DEE 
CHURCHES UNDER ST HENICAN DSUN TE TS WeAlye deb 
CHURCH USeN MS BLS © Pedy EER be DS Alas. © 
DISCUSSION OF THE RULERSHIP OF THE ROMAN 
BISHOP —IN WHAT WAY HE Is FIRST AMONG THE 
BUS ELO PSOw SEE EAT i Ele 
60. ‘To give a clearer understanding of our meaning, let us recall the 
things touched on above when we quoted St. Cyprian and Leo IX to 
the effect that every ruler is assigned a rank for his office according to 
41 


[PDF page 94]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
the law and privileges of the place over which he rules, and also that 
the ruler represents the whole church united to him — as Cyprian says, 
the church is in its ruler.' On that subject we say first that, as 
Ambrose writes in [C.] 2 q. 7 [c. 37] Beati, “Rome has the rulership 
and the headship of the nations” and this was done by divine intention 
so that “the center of holiness would be located in the place where the 
center of superstition had been.” Therefore the Roman bishop has 
the rank in [church] government that Rome had among the pagans. 
On this, see D. 80 [c. 1] Urbes quoting Pope Lucius, and Pope 
Clement in the chapter [c. 2] /n //lis of the same Distinction. And this 
arrangement was divinely inspired according to Leo in the chapter 
[c. 4] Z/lud of the same Distinction, on which see also D. gg [c. 1], 
Provinciae. 
61. Although Peter was set over the others by divine grant, accord- 
ing to Anacletus and to St. Jerome in the first book of Against Jovinian 
this was done with the concordant agreement of the apostles.’ As 
Augustine says above, the successors of Peter occupy the same chair; 
therefore the special privileges of the chair are the same now as then. 
Hence just as Peter was prince of the apostles, the Roman pontiff is 
prince of the bishops since the bishops succeeded the apostles. There 
is almost an infinite number of writings of the saints on this. This 
rulership is over all men in the church of the believers, for he is the 
captain of that army, as Emperor Leo wrote to Theodosius. Emperor 
Valentinian also wrote to Theodosius: “The most blessed bishop of 
the city of Rome to whom antiquity gave the priestly rule over all has 
the power of judgment in matters of faith.” And below: “Because of 
this power and according to the solemn decree of the councils, the 
bishop of Constantinople also appealed to him in writing on the 
dispute which had arisen concerning the faith.”’ Likewise Emperors 
Marcian and Valentinian wrote: “To Leo, the Archbishop of Rome, 
the glorious city: Your holiness fossesses the rulership in the epis- 
copate of the holy faith . . .”* On this, see D. 12 [c. 2] Praeceptis; [c] 24 
q. 1 [c. 12] Quotiens; and C. 16 q. 1 [c. 52] Frater noster. Hence I 
understand C. g q. 3 [c. 14] Aliorum as meaning that every believer is 
"Cf. nos. 34-38. 
*St. Jerome, Adversus Jovinianum, 1, 26 (PL 23, p. 258). Pope Anacletus is quoted in the 
Decretum, D. 21 ¢. 2. 
*Valentinianus, 4d Theodosium (PL. 54, p. 859). 
*Valentinianus and Marcianus, Ad Leonem, 1 (PL 54, p. 899). 
42 


[PDF page 95]
Book I, para. 62 
subject to the pope as long as he is head of the whole body, i.e., in the 
faith, for the body [of the church] is made up of the believers. Jerome 
also speaks in this way to Damasus in the tenth question of De 
Cathedra: “If anyone is united with the chair of Peter, he is united to 
me.”° However a matter of faith is not always defined by the arbitrary 
will (lit. — at the nod) of the Roman pontiff alone for he could be a 
heretic — on which more will be said below.° Indeed in decisions on 
matters of faith which is why he possesses the primacy, he is subject to 
the council of the Catholic church. 
St. Jerome, Ad Damasum (PL 22, P- 355)- 
© Book u, chapter 18. 
CHAR TE Re xa I 
THE ROMAN CHURCH SOMETIMES MEANS THE SEE 
OF ROME; WHEN THIS IS THE CASE; HOW MANY 
SEES THERE ARE; AND WHICH IS FIRST. ROME’S 
PRIMACY WAS DERIVED FROM THE PAGANS SINCE 
LHE ROMAN BISHOP POSSESSES His POSITION OF 
MMIGN ENCES BEGAUS EOF iE POST iON JOR Tbe GT Ty 
OF ROME. THIS IS SUPPORTED BY MANY 
ARGUMENTS, NOD LEAS TOF WHI GH ILS rie 
PRIVILEGE IGRAN TE DUB (GER TS a. 
62. Hence it should be noted that the Roman church is sometimes — 
even usually — understood as meaning the Roman see. In the time of 
the Nicene Council, there were three sees, those of Rome, Alexan- 
dria, and Antioch, although the bishop of Elia, that is, Jerusalem, was 
always honored, as appears in chapter 6 of the Nicene Council! and in 
D. 19 [c. 9] Anastasius; D. 66 [65] [c. 7] Quoniam Mos; and D. 22 [c. 2] 
Sacrosancta. After that council, the sees of Jerusalem and Constan- 
tinople are also found in the acts of the councils, and because Con- 
stantinople was the new Rome the bishop of Constantinople called 
himself the universal patriarch in a particular council before 
Chalcedon, and these five are called the patriarchal sees in D. 22 
"Council of Nicaea, canons 6 and 7 (Mansi 2, pp. 670ff.). 
43 


[PDF page 96]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
[c. 7] Diffinivimus. The question, we read, was settled in the following 
way in the Council of Chalcedon: Henceforth in the canons mention- 
ing both the vicar of the Apostolic See and the patriarch of Constan- 
tinople it was defined by the decree of the judges of the council that 
the Apostolic See should hold the first place because it was the old 
Rome, and Constantinople the second place as the new Rome, see 
D. 22 [c. 3] Constantinopolitanae, although Constantinople was to 
enjoy the same privileges of primacy, see D. 22 [c. 6] Renovantes. And 
although at that time Pope Leo tried in many letters to reverse the 
part of the definition which said that the patriarch of Constantinople 
would have second place — on the grounds that it went against the 
laws of the Council of Nicaea which, he wrote, were inviolable? — 
nevertheless this usage was established over a long period of time. 
Hence in the actions of the universal councils which followed, Con- 
stantinople always preceded Alexandria, see D. 22 [c. 6] Renovantes 
and the following chapter [c. 7], and [Decretals, v 33] De privilegtis, 
[c. 23] Antiqua. | find these five sees called the heads of the church in 
the seventh action of the acts of the Eighth Universal Council in 
Constantinople,’ and they are called apostolic sees in [C] 1 q. 7 [c. 4] 
Convenientibus and those occupying them are also called popes, as 
appears in the same place, as in Para. /tem Tharasius. In what way they 
are considered heads is discussed below. And just as the Pope of 
Rome is often called a patriarch, as is done practically throughout the 
acts of the councils, especially those of the Eighth Universal Council,* 
the other patriarchs are also called popes, as the Gloss on D. 40 [c. 6] 
Si Papa notes as well as the text of [the Gloss on] [C.] 22 q. 2 [c. 6] 
Sane Para. Item: Si Romanorum. But this is not very relevant to our 
purpose. 
63. Now it should be noted that the Apostolic See has the first place 
over all, see D. 22 [c. 4] De Constantinopolitana, Hincmar, the Arch- 
bishop of Rheims, in the 15th chapter of his work against the bishop 
of Laon, quotes from the brief [but] important definition of the 
Council of Nicaea in which, he said, the ancients held that every 
hierarchical gradation of primacy which existed among the pagans 
was established by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. And therefore 
See Pope Leo I, Ad Marcianum (PL 54, pp. ggiff.). 
: Eighth Council, Constantinople tv, Action 8 (Mansi 16, p. 140). 
*Eighth Council, Constantinople rv, c. 17 (Mansi 16, p. 17). 
° Hincmar of Rheims, Opusculum contra Hincmarum Laudunensem, ch. 15 (Plt2 6 p32): 
44 


[PDF page 97]
Book I, para. 64 
the definition of the Council of Chalcedon says that Rome has the 
primacy according to the canons, but the ancients would observe the 
rule regarding a city’s privileges that it should keep the governmental 
rank held by the high priests and others in the pagan cities.° But there 
is no doubt that the pontiff in the Capitoline of Rome was the highest 
officer in the temple of Jupiter and so it is [today] in the time of grace. 
Hence Empress [Galla] Placidia, when she wrote to her son, the 
emperor, said: “Because Rome is the greatest of cities and the mis- 
tress of all lands, Peter established the first rank of the divine episco- 
pacy there.’ That the ancients argued primacy from the rank of the 
cities involved is also evident in the dispute in the 12th action of the 
Council of Chalcedon, where the attempt is made in many arguments 
to prove on this basis that the bishop of Nicaea had been placed by the 
court over the bishop of Basianopolis.* In the first chapter of the 
Council of Turin it is also defined: ‘““Whoever has proved that his city 
is and has been of metropolitan rank, let him hold the primacy.” 
64. Note that primacy is derived from, and primarily based upon, 
the ranking of the city. The definition by 150 fathers and also after- 
wards by the Council of Chalcedon that placed the see of Constan- 
tinople after that of Rome is based on this, when it said: ““The fathers 
were right to return its prerogatives to the see of old Rome on account 
of the ruling power of that city. Guided by the same intention, 120 
most reverend bishops acted correctly in giving equal privileges to the 
holy see of the new Rome [Constantinople] since they judged that the 
city honored with the presence of the emperor and senate should 
enjoy privileges equal to those of the old Rome and have an import- 
ance in church affairs like it, and rank second after it.”!” This is the 
incontrovertible argument which was approved at the Council of 
Chalcedon. And although the emperors gave exemptions to certain 
prelates, nevertheless as is indicated there, this ancient right has 
always remained unaffected and secure. Hence, insofar as what we 
say approaches the truth, it can be concluded that if we were to argue 
the primacy of a see on the basis of the sanctity of the first one to 
exercise authority there or out of reverence for its location, there is no 
® Council of Chalcedon, Action 16 (Mansi 17, p. 443). 
7Galla Placidia, Ad Theodosum (PL. 54, p. 861). 
® Council of Chalcedon, Action 13 (Mansi, 7, p. 302). 
’ Council of Turin, c. 2 (Mansi 3, pl 861). 
Council of Chalcedon, c. 28 (Mansi 7, p. 370). See also c. 16 (Mansi 7, p. 41). 
45 


[PDF page 98]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
doubt that Jerusalem would be first for there the Highest Pontiff 
washed the church in His blood. It was also the see of the Apostle 
James, the first archbishop, as appears in the first action of the Eighth 
Universal Council, about whose see [cathedra] Eusebius writes well in 
Book vu, chapter 16.'! Also the writers on the canonical epistles [of 
the New Testament] assert that those of James are placed first because 
he was the first to hold the see of Jerusalem which was the first in 
Christendom. Paul also puts James first when he speaks of the pillars of 
the church. Alexandria is not allotted the first position because its first 
bishop, Mark, is not placed ahead of Saint John, the Beloved [Dis- 
ciple], and Mark presided in Alexandria and John in Ephesus. Yet 
neither is Ephesus preferred over Alexandria because of its importance 
as a bishopric since Alexandria was of greater secular importance than 
Ephesus. But we should believe that both factors, not only secular 
importance but also religious reasons were involved in determining the 
pre-eminence of these sees — as Pope Innocent writes to Alexander 
concerning the see of Antioch, where he says: “Hence we note that this 
rank was given to it both because of the importance of the city and 
because it was shown to be the first see of the first apostle.”’! 
65. Nevertheless, although in the beginning the ranks in the church 
were assigned by the sacred councils and holy fathers according to the 
[secular] importance of the place, the rank of the bishop of a given 
locality does not increase with an increase in temporal power unless 
there is a decision of a council to this effect. Hence when Acatius said 
that he was bishop of the royal city and therefore of such high rank 
that he could not be judged by the Apostolic bishop, Pope Gelasius 
wrote to the bishops in Troy that he laughed at this, saying: “Was the 
empire not ruled for lengthy periods from Milan, Ravenna, Sirmium, 
and Trier? Have the bishops of these cities assumed more than what 
was allotted to them in antiquity?”'’ There is more on this there. Also 
on this topic Pope Anastasius says in a letter to Bishop Alexander 
which begins: Onus et honor, that the church of Antioch has yielded to 
that of Rome and that metropolitan bishops should not be named by 
the emperors but according to the ancient custom of the provinces.'* 
On this, see D. 10 [c. 1] Jmperiali. 
66. Because there has been a lengthy discussion of this above, I 
'ighth Council, Constantinople tv, Action 1 (Mansi 16, p. 27), and Eusebius of 
Caesarea, Ecclesiastical History (PG 20, p. 68). 
'2 Pope Innocent I, Ad Alexandrum (PL 20, p. 548). 
SPincoupe IS Ply 20; p. 48: 
46 


[PDF page 99]
Book I, para. 67 
think that we may conclude that the Roman see rightly possesses the 
primacy by the statutes of the councils, because of its secular import- 
ance, [and] by divine grant, for the increase of the faith and the 
preservation of peace, and on account of having had so many holy 
popes, more than thirty of whom in succession were crowned as 
martyrs for the faith. 
CHAPTER XVII 
THE ROMAN CHURCH IS SOMETIMES UNDERSTOOD 
AS MEANING ALL THOSE DIREGDLY GCONNEGTED TO 
LDS CAN DSO MED UMES) TBS FE TS DAKE IN GAS 
MEANING THE PONTIPE. His [ROMAN] CHURCH 
SOMETIMES MEANS THE POPE, THE G@LERGY, AND 
DHE PALL OE ULIOR EIS IDIOGESE. SOMETIMES ED 
REFERS TO His SUBJECTS AS A METROPOLITAN, 
SOMETIMES TO THOSE SUBJECT TO HIM AS A 
PATRIARGHY AND SOMETIMES TO THE CHURGE OF 
THE FAITHFUL. THERE IS ALSO A DISCUSSION OF 
WHAT IT MEANS TO SAY THAT THE ROMAN CHURECH 
CANNOT ERR. 
67. Sometimes however the Roman church is taken for those most 
directly connected to the Roman church. See, for example, the 
pamphlet of Leo IX against the claims of Michael of Constantinople, 
chapter 32, where he says that the Roman church is like “the hinge on 
which the door of the church turns and it will always remain firm.”! 
His clergy are called cardinals because they are close to that hinge 
[cardo|. The Emperor Constantine writes to Pope Agatho at the 
beginning of the acts of the Sixth Universal Council to send three 
persons from his church and twelve metropolitans from his full 
council. From this example we can conclude that sometimes “the 
Apostolic See” means the Roman pontiffs, [and] that sometimes “the 
Roman church” means the pope with the clergy and laity of his 
diocese and sometimes all those under his see as metropolitan and 
archbishop — since many universal councils call him the archbishop of 
SPL 143, pl 765. 2 Sixth Council, Constantinople m, Action 1 (Mansi 11, p. 199). 
47 


[PDF page 100]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
Rome. At times it also means all the metropolitan churches united to 
him as their patriarch and head in his patriarchal see. For example in 
the seventh action of the Eighth Universal Council when he speaks of 
the opinion of the council of Rome the representative of the Patriarch 
of Jerusalem says: ““The Holy Spirit which has spoken in the church 
of the Romans, has also spoken in ours.’* At times “the Roman 
church” means the church made up of all the faithful united with the 
Roman church as its head. Hence when we say that the Roman 
church can never err, this is true of the whole universal church 
considered in this last way. And after that it is also true of the 
patriarchate of Rome. Then it is true of it as an archbishopric. And 
finally it is true of Rome as a bishopric. 
68. But these possess the truth in varying degrees. The first is 
infallible and always was and always will be. The second is infallible 
today for the reason that the universal church is almost completely 
reduced to the patriarchate of Rome. Then in considering the 
patriarchal sees, the faith is also always more true in the patriarchate 
of Rome and so it was and will be, although by the promise of Christ 
the universal church possesses greater certainty. The belief of the 
archbishopric of the city of Rome is still more fallible, and that of the 
bishopric more fallible, although from the beginning of the faith the 
patriarchate of Rome among all the patriarchates, the archbishop of 
Rome among all the archbishoprics, and the bishopric of Rome 
among all the bishoprics were more certain and less fallible. And it 
will be this way until the last day. It appears in the acts of the Eighth 
Universal Council that Bahanes, a most renowned prefect of the court 
and patrician, said that the patriarchal sees ought to be reduced 
successively to one patriarchate and that through it God ought to 
create the other patriarchates anew.* Alas, now we see that the first 
part of his statement has come true. May God grant that we may see 
the second come true in our lifetimes! And because, as I have said, 
the Roman church (and also another, Constantinople) is often taken 
for the subordinate churches united with it, and this union is called by 
the Greeks a synod, and by us a council, it remains now to add some 
things about the council. The discussion of the councils follows. 
END OF BOOK 1 
Eighth Council, Constantinople 1v, Action 8 (Mansi 16, p. 86). 
* Eighth Council, Constantinople tv, Action 8 (Mansi 16, p- 140). 
48 


[PDF page 101]
CEU AVP AER 
A SYNOD IS A MEETING OF BISHOPS AND PRIESTS 
WHOS DRIVE, LOSCOME LOVAGREE MEN TAS ONE: 
DHOSESLELASE DISAGREE DOINODT CONSE LEU TE A 
COUNCIL. COUNCILS ARE OF VARIOUS RANKS FROM 
EE RARs GUL ARS Os EU GIN DV ERS AE AND Sa ELE 
TERM, UNIVERSAL GCOUNGIL, HAS) VARIOUS 
NUEPAIN UNG. 5). EGE (GinAP TE Re EGP ALN SG. EB 
GRADATIONS EPROM THE LOWEST SYNOD UP, TO) THE 
HIGHEST. 
69. My intention is briefly to examine and compare the various 
synods to determine their authority, and from this to resolve certain 
doubts. First of all, a synod properly speaking is a gathering of bishops 
and priests.' It is called a synod from syn which means “‘at the same 
time” and hodos or “way” because all travel in one way towards the 
same end. Synod is a Greek word. It is translated as an “assembly” 
[coetus| see D. 15 [c. 1] Canones para. Synodus, and is called in Latin 
concilium [council]. Isidore tells us why it is called a council in D. 15 
[c. 1] Canones Concilii, and its distinctive characteristic is concord. As 
is said there, those who disagree among themselves do not form a 
council. There are different kinds of synods since they take place on 
different levels from the local to the universal through various inter- 
mediate grades. According to Bartholomew of Brescia, who follows 
Huguccio in the interpretation of D. 16 c. 1, a council or synod is 
universal if it is composed of the pope or his legate together with all 
the bishops.* 
70. But perhaps this definition is insufficient [for the council of the 
'The Latin is “senum et presbyterorum” — elders and priests, but the context seems to 
indicate that the senes are bishops. 
* Bartholomew of Brescia wrote an Apparatus to Joannes Teutonicus’ Gloss on Gratian’s 
Decretum that is in the library at Kues (no. 224). Huguccio wrote his Summa on the 
Decretum earlier. Bartholomew’s comment is on Decretum D. 17, not D. 16. 
49 


[PDF page 102]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
universal church] since it can also apply to the universal council of the 
Apostolic See [Rome] which I discuss in the next chapter. But it is 
true that it is essential to a council if it is to be full and perfect that the 
legate of the Apostolic See must at least be present, as appears in D. 3 
[c. 2] Porro and D. 17 [c. 2] Regula. But Hincmar of Rheims in his 
2oth chapter discussing this holds that the fourth volume of a book on 
a certain general council on the veneration of images which was held 
in France in the time of Charlemagne contained the following: “It is 
called one corporate body [universitas] from the fact that it proceeds 
by bringing many tendencies to unity. For a multitude becomes a 
corporate body [wniversitas] when it is united as one. And as the 
universal church is called Catholic in Greek, so it is certain that 
whatever does not depart from that unity can be called Catholic. For 
every Christian doctrine, decree, or tradition ought to apply to the 
universal church. Heretics have never maintained this universality in 
the smaller meetings [conventicles] that they have held in various 
geographically restricted parts of the world, for by their actions they 
have separated themselves and many others from the fellowship of the 
church. Therefore when the bishops of two or three provinces meet 
and legislate on things that are appropriate for the Catholic church, 
the meeting can perhaps be called universal even though it does not 
involve all the [church] authorities in the world. It is sufficient that it 
not differ from the faith and tradition of all.’”* And there is more 
there. 
71. Moreover a gathering of the church fathers can be called a 
universal council for various reasons: either because the fathers dis- 
cuss and define as true a doctrine of the Catholic church, or because 
they deliberate about the state of the universal church, or about a 
general case affecting the entirety of a certain large province and 
obedience. For depending on what the council decides that decision 
acquires a universal character. If it concerns a case which is common 
to all, as I have said, it is properly and generally called universal when 
the full assembly makes a universal Catholic definition. But another 
council although it is called universal because of its general subject 
matter may still not be a universal catholic council properly speaking. 
Thus the Council of Africa when it legislated on this latter type of 
universal council said: “So that the requirement of an annual meeting 
> Hincmar of Rheims, Opusculum contra Hincmarum Laudunensem, ch. 20 (PL 126, p. 360) 
in the library at Kues (no. 52). 
50 


[PDF page 103]
Book Il, para. 72 
may not tire the brethren, it has been decided that whenever there is a 
subject of common interest to all Africa, there will be a universal 
gathering. However cases that are not of general interest should be 
judged in each province.’”* And it is right to call the councils in which 
some definition of the faith against heretics was made, universal 
councils, as the text of D. 100 [c. 4] Optatum proves, although every 
universal council should also publish canons, see D. 16 [c. 6] Habeo. 
But there are different conciliar gatherings ranking from the lowest 
through various intermediate grades up to the highest universal 
synod. A curate gathers a synod of his parish, and there is a diocesan 
synod above him, above which is the metropolitan synod, and above 
that the provincial synod in the kingdom or nation, over which is the 
patriarchal [council] and the greatest of all is the council of the 
universal Catholic church. And as [Pope] Leo says to [Emperor] 
Marcian in the letter in which he writes about the delegation sent to 
represent him at the Council of Chalcedon, “Nothing that is not 
based on the truth of faith should be considered a council. It is more 
accurate to call any other meeting a pseudo-council [conciliabulum].””° 
*Canon 62 of the Council of Carthage (A.D. 419) in North Africa, also cited by Hincmar 
(PL 67, pp. 213ff., and Mansi, 3, p. 79). 
> Paulus Hinschius (ed.), Decretales Pseudo-Isidoreana, Leipzig, 1863, p. 608. Subsequent 
footnotes will cite Hinschius. 
CHAPTER Tf 
ANY PRESIDING AUTHORITY NORMALLY HAS THE 
RIGHT TO GALLE THE'SY NOD SUBJEGT LO HIM: 
THERE OREM HES: @ Pion As) ibe RiG Es 2 OvGAgeE 
THE UNIVERSAL "COUNCIL. WHAT TSoMPANT BY 
SAYING BHAT NORMALLY THE UNIVERSAL GCOUNGIE 
CANNOT TAKE PEACE WIT HOUR Lik 
AUTHORIZATION OR CHEIPOPRE. 
72. Any presiding authority in the church of whatever rank has the 
right to call together those under him. Without him or his represen- 
tative, a council is not considered fully valid or properly assembled. 
Hence since the Roman pontiff is the highest officer in the church 
51 


[PDF page 104]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
militant and ranks first among the bishops of the faith, ordinarily it is 
not legitimate to hold a universal council without him or his 
authorization, D. 96 [c. 4] Ubi Nam, D. 17 [c. 6] Hinc Etiam and the 
chapter [2] Regula, and [Pope] Leo IX writes on this in a letter to 
Peter of Carthage! to the same effect, see C. 3 q. 6 [c. 9] Dudum, and 
the same thing appears in many places. A provincial council likewise 
cannot be celebrated without the metropolitan [of the province] nor a 
universal patriarchal council without the patriarch, nor a diocesan 
council without the bishop. The reason is obvious and the decrees of 
the holy councils demonstrate this in various passages, see D. 17 [c. 2] 
Regula with the chapters which follow and D. 18 [c. 4] Propter, and the 
chapter [12] Si Quis and the following chapter. The convocation of 
the universal council belongs to the universal patriarch. Therefore 
[Pope] Pelagius [II] writes to the bishops called together by John of 
Constantinople, “It has been reported to the Apostolic See that John 
of Constantinople describes himself as the universal bishop and in his 
presumption is calling you to a general synod etc.” Marcellus, pope 
and martyr, speaks as follows in chapter 5 of his decrees: “By divine 
inspiration, the apostles and their successors decreed that no synod 
should take place outside the authority of the Roman see. For the 
bishop of that see is the judge of the whole church and no judgment is 
valid without a legitimate judge.” Pope Damasus also affirms this in 
chapter g of his decrees. Likewise the Roman pontiffs, Anastasius, 
Athanasius, and Julius.’ 
73. Therefore it is not necessary to insist too much on this. 
Although we often read that universal councils were called together 
by emperors — in fact all eight [of the ecumenical councils] were 
called by them as can be seen from their acts up to the Eighth which 
was called at the time of Emperor Basil at Constantinople, see D. 15 
[c. 1] — nevertheless, the presiding authority of the Roman pontiff was 
always present in the councils and without it there would have been 
no universal council, provided that he was at least willing and able to 
be present. Hence just as there is no perfect provincial synod without 
the metropolitan, as appears in the next to the last action of the 
Council of Chalcedon? — and this is the common opinion of all the 
PL 143, p. 730: 
*Hinschius, pp. 720, 223, 502ff, and 456. 
3 Mansi 7, p. 378. Emperor Basil I (867-886) whom Nicholas repeatedly praises was an 
illiterate Armenian who murdered his predecessor in order to become Byzantine 
52 


[PDF page 105]
Book Il, para. 74 
ancients — so in the case of the universal council, the pope [must be 
present] provided that he is at least willing and able to be present. 
Otherwise, if the council waits for him and he does not send anyone 
or does not come or does not wish to do so, the council ought to 
provide for its needs and for the welfare of the church. This is well 
proven by the text of the Eighth Universal Council which is entitled: 
“A Decree by the Council Before the Arrival of the Representatives 
of Old Rome” where after further discussion indicating that they had 
been waiting for the representatives of the bishop of Rome for a long 
time and that it was not right to wait longer, the Council adds: “We 
hold it altogether unsuitable to take no action on the precarious state 
of the church of Christ, our Saviour, by putting off needed decisions. 
For this reason, constrained by necessity, we denounce etc .. .”* On 
the same subject we read in the acts of the Second Synod of Ephesus 
that when the council notified Bishop Julius, Deacon Hilary and the 
Notary Dulcitius who were the ambassadors of Pope Leo, that the 
council would sit on the day after the next and asked them to come 
quickly and they did not come, Thalassius, bishop of Caesarea in 
Upper Cappodocia said, “For us to delay in this city brings consider- 
able harm to all the most devout and holy bishops and the holy 
churches. Furthermore our most devout Christian emperor wishes to 
hasten the end of the synod so that he may take specific legal 
cognizance of the things that are decided. Because therefore we have 
done what is fitting for a holy synod — those who represent the holy 
Archbishop Leo, most beloved of God, have been advised by messen- 
gers sent to them, and they have refused to meet with us -, | think that 
postponement is not necessary. However if the holy synod wishes to 
do so, let us not delay beyond the customary waiting period.’” 
74. Thus he said that it is sufficient for a synod to give a formal 
warning, especially when the papal representatives refuse to come. 
Nevertheless as the text of the Eighth Council cited earlier proves, 
emperor. The Fourth Council of Constantinople (869-870) is recognized by the Roman 
Catholic church but not by the Orthodox churches, as the Eighth Ecumenical Council. 
It was important for Nicholas as the last occasion at which the Eastern and Western 
churches were in agreement, settling the Photian schism. 
+Mansi 16, pp. 30ff. 
Kallen notes in the Heidelberg Latin edition (p. 99) that there is no Latin text of the 
“Robber Council” of Ephesus (A.D. 449) extant today although Nicholas seems to have 
used one. That Council’s decisions were reversed by the Council of Chalcedon (A.D. 
451) and the pope described it as a “latrocinium” (robbery). 
Leal iS) 


[PDF page 106]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
nothing should be done in haste and the council should wait for the 
representatives of the Roman pontiff for a long time — as they waited 
in this case for a year and more. And in matters of faith, even a 
legitimately assembled council if it still lacks the authorization of the 
Apostolic See, may not proceed without considering the opinion of 
the Roman church. 
CHAPTER It 
DHE PUL UNIVERSAL GOUNCIL TSeMADE WP ORT ERE 
ELVE PATRRIARGHATES. ln oISsh sSHNERTALERORRA 
COUNCIL TO BE CELEBRATED IN PUBLIC AND NOT 
IN SECRET, IN COMPLETE FREEDOM WITHOUT 
FEAR, AND IN AN ORDERLY AND CANONICAL 
FASHION WIrFHOUT DISTURBANCE. OTHERWISE IF 
[Pais NOT GELEBRATED! IN PROPER FORM, [i GAN 
BE IN ERROR, AND ONE CAN APPEAL FROM IT TO 
ANOTHER COUNCIL. MANY THINGS ARE SAID THAT 
SHOULD BE ESPE GVAh bY IN Om ED: 
75. The acts of the Eighth Council clearly teach that a full universal 
council is constituted of the five patriarchal sees. For it is said at the 
end of that Council that Emperor Basil “by divine help and grace” 
brought together the five patriarchs, “the builders of the tabernacle of 
the church, from the ends of the earth.’! And there is more on this 
subject there. The text is contained in Book mt below. And in the 
ninth action of the same Council we read that the synod, on receiving 
the representative of the see of Alexandria who arrived last, said, “We 
glorify God, the creator of the universe, who has provided what was 
lacking to the universal synod, rendering it now most perfect, etc.’ 
From this we conclude that a fully perfect synod is made up of the 
heads of the whole church. Hence I do not think that [all the] 
emphasis should be placed on the [form of the] convocation of the 
council in determining its validity, provided that at least the fathers 
are there who represent the universal church. But if neither the 
"Mansi 16, p. 179. 
* Mansi 16, p. 147. 
54 


[PDF page 107]
Book IT, para. 76 
fathers who are the heads of the churches are there nor is there a 
legitimate convocation by the highest power, there is no doubt that the 
universal church cannot be represented in that council. But where it 
has already been legitimately called together and the fathers who are 
the heads [of the churches] have not yet come together, I do not 
believe that one should proceed immediately, for we read that many 
councils including those which had been properly called have been in 
error. Rather it is necessary to wait for the fathers, although not all of 
them, for it is sufficient for a majority to be there if all have been 
called. This, we read, was the reply to St. Ambrose in the Council of 
Aquileia to the heretic Palladius when he refused to answer concern- 
ing his beliefs because the Eastern bishops were not present. When 
Palladius said that he only was required to answer for his faith in a full 
council, which was not true of the present meeting, St. Ambrose 
concluded: “The Eastern emperors summoned them and so they 
could have come, so that this claim is an evasion.”” In addition for a 
universal council to be valid it must be celebrated in public, not 
secretly — as is evident in the fifth action of the Eighth Universal 
Council.* 
76. Likewise everyone in it should be able to speak freely, as 
appears in the first action of the Sixth General Council held in the 
time of [Pope] Agatho, and at the end of the letter to the council by 
Agatho.° Thus when an objection was put to Pope Nicholas concern- 
ing the large numbers at the council called by Photius, he said, “We 
follow the conciliar legislation of the holy fathers at Nicaea, 
Chalcedon, and other councils and revere their decisions, not just 
because of the numbers of bishops assembled there but because they 
were free, just, and divinely inspired.”® From this we conclude that 
the number of the fathers together with freedom of speech confer 
great authority [on a council], for more support is given to what is 
decided by many rather than by few, see D. 19 [c. 6] Jn canonicis; 
D. 20 [c. 3] De quibus; [C.] 2 q. 7 le. 35] Puto, and freedom and 
unanimity are as necessary as numbers, see [C.] 24 q. 1 [c. 19] 
Alienus. Hence Agatho when he writes to Constantine, in the place 
noted above, about the fathers to be assembled in the Sixth Council 
says, “Give permission to speak freely to everyone who wishes to 
speak on the faith that he believes and holds so that all may recognize 
3 Mansi 3, pp. 6o2ff. *Mansi 16, p. 78. 
> Mansi 11, p. 283. °PL 119, pp. 792¢F. 
al nn 


[PDF page 108]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
clearly that no one who wished to speak about the truth was in any way 
impeded or dissuaded by fear, power, threats, or rejection.” And 
again, “Private matters ought not to be dealt with under the pretext of 
religion.”’ Thus Pope Leo wrote to Emperor Theodosius on the 
errors of the Synod of Ephesus: “When private matters are dealt with 
under the pretext of religion, the impiety of a few harms the universal 
church. We have learned from a not unreliable source that many 
priests met at the synod whose participation would at least have been 
useful in the discussion and decisions if the one who claimed the 
presiding seat for himself had been willing to preserve sacerdotal 
moderation so that, as is customary, the decision could be arrived at 
freely by everyone in the tranquil and just spirit proper to the faith for 
the assistance of those in error. But we have found out that not all the 
council members participated in this decision. For we have learned 
that some were excluded and others were brought in who, by the 
intention of the above-mentioned priest, signed the unholy decisions 
under compulsion because they knew that it would adversely affect 
their positions if they did not do as they were commanded. The 
decision announced by him, although directed at one man, appeared 
as a direct attack on the whole church. Our representatives sent from 
the Apostolic See saw this as indeed unholy and contrary to the 
Catholic faith, and no pressure could compel them to consent. In vain 
they kept protesting in that synod, as was their duty, that what was 
being decided would not be accepted by the Apostolic See.” And 
further on he says, “All the priests in our part of the church beseech 
Your Grace with sighs and tears to order a general council in Italy, 
since our representatives registered protests in good faith and Bishop 
Flavian has submitted a formal appeal.” And below, “As is considered 
necessary when an appeal has been made, the decrees adopted at the 
Council of Nicaea which were adopted by the clergy of the whole 
world are cited in support.’””* 
77. Now this is an essential requirement for a universal council at 
which general matters are to be discussed that a hearing be given to 
all in complete freedom, not in secret but publicly. If anything is then 
defined by general agreement it is considered to be inspired by the 
Holy Spirit and infallibly decided by Christ who is present among 
those gathered in his name. This was the way it was at the Council of 
7Mansi 11, p. 283. 
SPL 54, pp. 827ff. 
56 


[PDF page 109]
Book Il, para. 77 
Nicaea, where we read in the acts of the Council of Chalcedon the 
Holy Spirit was clearly present among the fathers. The Council 
added that the Holy Spirit commands what is commanded in councils 
of this kind, so that he who violates them rejects the grace of the Holy 
Spirit. The holy synod said, “We all say this. Anathema be he who 
rejects it.”’ This is the way it was with all orthodox councils. And 
therefore at the end of the Eighth Council when the reason was given 
that it should be obeyed, the Council said, “By the power given to us 
by the Holy Spirit who is our most high and mighty pontiff.” And 
below, “Who does not know that Christ the Lord, infinite and incom- 
prehensible, who said, ‘Where two or three were gathered’ etc., was in 
the midst of the sacred synod?’’!? That the power of the council is 
most high is evident from what Elpidius, a man of respectable rank, 
said to the Council of Chalcedon, as it appears in the first action: 
“Today the God of all, the Word, the Saviour, has given himself to 
you for judgment. He accepts those who decide, and he honors the 
authority of their decision.”’'' The first and fifth actions of the Eighth 
Council contain the statement which is the basis of the fathers’ power 
in council when they say: ““The most holy representatives of old Rome 
and we who are representatives of the other sees decide all these 
things today by the grace of Jesus Christ who granted us the power of 
the highest priesthood, that of binding and loosing, etc.”'? Hence the 
power of binding and loosing was given to Peter as the representative 
of the church. This is the statement on which the decision of the 
synod bases its force. Isidore [of Seville] writes well about the auth- 
ority of the councils, as can be seen at the beginning of the book that 
he wrote on the synods." 
” Mansi 6, p. 627. '0 Mansi 16, pp. rgoff. 
'l Mansi 6, p. 619. "2 Mansi 16, p. 86. 
'S5 Cusanus is referring to the section of St. Isidore of Seville’s Etymologies that deals with 
conciliar legislation (v1, 16, printed in PL 82, p. 243). 


[PDF page 110]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
CHAP AE Ra 
FOR THE DEFINITIONS OF A UNIVERSAL COUNCIL 
TO BECGONSIDEREDEAS INSPIRED TE YabElb eH O1ny 
SPIRIT, ITS PRONOUNCEMENTS AND DECREES MUST 
BE ADOPTED WITH THE CONCORDANCE AND 
COMMON CONSENT OF ALL. 
78. Ihave said that if a [conciliar] definition is made with [general] 
agreement we believe that the Holy Spirit who is the author of peace 
and concord has acted. For it is not human but divine that various 
men brought together in complete freedom of speech should come to 
agreement as one. And this should be presumed in all cases. This is 
the way it appears in the fifth action of the Eighth Council where the 
fathers, when they speak of the decision of the council, assert that 
they were prompted by divine inspiration because the decision was 
promulgated with the unanimous agreement of the holy synod.’ And 
after the end of the Eighth Universal Council at Constantinople, 
Emperor Basil said to the synod, “Now let the holy and universal 
synod say whether the present conclusion has been reached with the 
consent of all the holy bishops in agreement. For religious matters 
should be proclaimed and confirmed in church bodies with the con- 
sent and concordance of all.” The holy synod replied, ““We all under- 
stand it this way. We all proclaim this. We all readily subscribe to this 
in harmonious agreement. This is the judgment of truth. This is the 
decree of justice.”” There is more there on this. 
79. Note that agreement [concordantia| is particularly required on 
matters of faith and the greater the agreement the more infallible the 
judgment. Hence, as appears in the Council of Chalcedon, ordinarily 
the majority always rules and its decision is presumed more certain. 
Nevertheless the opinion above indicates that a decision on a matter 
of faith is not certain unless the greatest possible number of priests 
has agreed to it. The opinion of St. Cyprian is that since by the decree 
of Christ the majority will always remain without error, the opinion of 
the majority has a great presumption in its favor so that if that opinion 
remains fixed and unchanged among them, the presumptive judg- 
"Mansi 16, p. 80. * Mansi 16, p. 185. 
3 The Council of Chalcedon did not speak of majority rule (Kallen, DCC, p. 106). 
58 


[PDF page 111]
Book II, para. 81 
ment is very great.* For truth remains for ever and ever and falsehood 
cannot endure for a long time. 
80. Although many things are necessary for universal synods, the 
common decision of all, as indicated above, is the most important. 
Hence Pope Leo says to the Synod of Ephesus, “In an act of true 
religious piety, our most Christian emperor wished to hold a council 
of bishops so that a decision by a larger number could eliminate every 
error. I have sent our brethren, Bishop Julius, Renatus the priest, and 
my son, Hilary the deacon, and with them Dulcitius, a notary of 
proven faith, who are to attend your holy meeting, my brethren, as my 
representatives and they are to decide by common agreement with 
you whatever may be pleasing to God.’””” Note that the business of the 
sacred council was to be decided by the common agreement of the 
legates and the others. 
81. Especially in matters of the faith, which is necessarily one and 
unchangeable — as it has been and will remain — the holy universal 
council should always be guided by the rules that the Holy Spirit has 
now clearly expressed in the canon of the Holy Scripture and in past 
councils. It should search the Scriptures when in doubt, as was done 
in the Sixth Universal Council and in many others, and then from 
what has been said the [resulting] definition will necessarily be free of 
error. However if these conditions are not observed, especially a free 
hearing for all, and if attempts are made in synods to adopt things that 
are opposed to the faith of the Roman church, it is proper to issue a 
protest and to appeal to a future council, as is demonstrated above. 
And this is demonstrated more clearly still in the letter from Pope Leo 
and the Roman synod to Empress Pulcheria which says that the 
legates of the Apostolic See at the Synod of Ephesus protested its 
invalidity because of the force and intimidation employed, and stated 
that no physical pressure could cause them to depart from the faith 
which they had brought from the see of Peter to the holy synod.° 
From this it can also be concluded that the faith of the Roman church 
can be overruled by no universal synod — this being true, as will be 
explained below,’ of the faith of that whole church expressed in its 
patriarchal synod. 
* Cyprian is also cited on majority rule in Book 1, ch. 4, no. 43, and ch. 14, no. 58. 
*PL 54, p- 799- , © Pope Leo, Ad Pulcheriam Augustam (PL 54, pp. 833ff.). 
7Cf. no. 140. 


[PDF page 112]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
Cae AV PAT Rav 
ALTHOUGH WE READ THAT MANY COUNCILS WERE 
IN ERROR THAT WERE ATTENDED BY THE LEGATES 
OF LHECAR OSLO LIGIER NONE: OR aie Eb VumWiAts 
GARRIED OUT PROPERLY. DHISMS PROVED PROM 
SPE GIELG PSE UDO-= COUNIGEHIES SUNG Wirt Ag SWihiyg 
UNIVERSAL COUNCILS CORRECT LOCAL COUN EGIUS 
LSSDEIS | GUSSE DEAS SWE DESAS REE GiRIBAGSS TREN Gaeet 
OF THE UNIVERSAL GATHOLIG CHURCH. 
82. Having considered these things, if we turn to the various acts by 
pseudo-councils [conciliabula| we will find that none actually fulfilled 
these basic conditions. For either they were held in secret or the 
results were arranged beforehand or they were compelled to act out of 
fear. Therefore although it could be said that the Council of Rimini 
consisted of 330 bishops, an objection that was put to Augustine when 
he wrote against Felicianus on the Trinity, it was found that it was not 
properly, openly, and freely gathered together nor fixed in its conclu- 
sion.' On this Pope Liberius and the western bishops write in a letter 
to Eustachius and Cyril which begins Optabile nobis, that those who 
had been in Rimini had returned to the declaration of faith of the 
Council of Nicaea.’ Ambrose in Book 1, chapter 8 of On the Father and 
the Son (De Patre et Filio| says, “You have heard, O holy emperor, that 
those who assert such things have been rightly condemned. 318 
bishops came to Nicaea not by human effort or arrangement but so 
that the Lord Jesus might prove that he was present in their consent 
from the fact that their numbers were a sign of his passion and his 
name, since the number 300 is the cross [T in Greek numerals] and 
18 is the first two letters of “Jesus” in Greek [[H in Greek numerals]. 
The profession of faith of the Council of Rimini and the statement of 
correction issued after the Council of Rimini both showed this. A 
letter sent to Emperor Constantius bears witness to the profession; 
subsequent councils attest to the correction.’””’ Ambrose also writes in 
"St. Augustine, Collatio cum Maximino Arianorum episcopo (PL. 42, pp. 710ff.). The 
Council of Rimini was held in 359. 
?PL 8, p. 1585. 
*St. Ambrose, De fide, 1, 18 (PL 16, p. 579). The signature lists are defective so that the 
actual number of participants is not known. 
60 


[PDF page 113]
Book II, para. &2 
his 77th letter against Auxentius, that the “Robber Council” of 
Rimini was gathered in secret and was corrected.* Augustine in the 
aforementioned work against Felicianus says that the decrees of that 
pseudo-council [conciliabulum| have disappeared with the same 
facility with which they were decreed. How this was done he explains 
in the same place.” And many writers assert that the council issued 
decrees that were signed under compulsion due to interference and 
pressure from Constantius. Liberius was pope at that time, and, as 
Augustine writes to Crescentius, he subscribed to the Arian sect.° At 
first he resisted and was therefore sent into exile. (There is an inter- 
esting disputation on the subject between Emperor Constantius and 
Liberius.) However he returned from exile and was forced to consent 
to false doctrine, as St. Jerome writes in his Chronicles.’ But we do not 
find that he was present at that council either in person or through 
representatives. Hence Pope Damasus and the other bishops who 
were assembled in Rome write to their “most beloved brethren” in 
Illyria: ““The numbers assembled at the Council of Rimini do not 
constitute an objection to its invalidity since it is clear that neither the 
Roman bishop whose decision they should have awaited before taking 
any action, nor Vincentius who was bishop without interruption for so 
many years, nor others gave their consent to these things — especially 
since, as we have said before, the very ones who seemed to have 
yielded in the meeting have now followed wiser counsel and indicated 
their disapproval.”’* Hence that pseudo-council [conciliabulum]| had 
many defects. The same thing is clear in the case of the Second 
Council of Ephesus, since, although it was properly assembled in the 
presence of the representatives of Pope Leo, there was no freedom, 
an erroneous decision was taken without agreement, and the papal 
representatives protested and appealed as is clearly indicated in the 
acts of the Council of Chalcedon. The fathers who subscribed to its 
decisions confessed that they had done so out of fear of bodily harm, 
as Pope Leo also writes on this subject to Emperor Theodosius and 
Empress Pulcheria.” We also know from the acts of the Eighth 
Universal Council that the legates of the Apostolic See and others 
val TO; p: 105 7 
> See note 1. 
Not in the published works of St. Augustine. 
7PL 27, p. 501. 
’Hinschius, pp. 5 18ff. 
’ Hinschius, pp. 601-602. 
61 


[PDF page 114]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
who were present at the council organized by Photius, could not act 
freely.'° The same thing appears in [C.] 16 q. 6 [7, c. 15] Sane. 
83. Augustine writes, however, that local councils of one bishop or 
province are corrected by universal councils, and this is contained in 
C. 2 q. 7 [c. 35] Puto Item: Cum Petrus. Also the council of 86 bishops 
including St. Cyprian, which Augustine mentions in his letter to 
Vincentius Rogatista, and also in Book 11 of Against the Donatists, was 
corrected by a later universal council.'’ Augustine says in Book 1 of his 
work Against the Donatists when he wishes to prove that the faith is 
firmly based on the decision of the universal council, “Do not think 
that | am using human arguments since in earlier times in the church 
before the schism of Donatus the obscurity of this question compelled 
many men and bishops of great charity to debate and disagree among 
themselves while keeping the peace, so that for a long time differing 
conciliar statutes were adopted and amended in each area, until the 
view which was considered more salutary was confirmed and doubts 
were removed by a full council of the whole world.”'? And likewise to 
prove that local councils are corrected by plenary ones as well as 
plenary councils by subsequent plenary ones in cases of an error of 
fact, see Book 1 of On Baptism, ““Who does not know that councils that 
take place in individual regions or provinces unquestionably yield to 
the authority of plenary councils which are made up of the whole 
Christian world, [and] that earlier plenary councils are corrected by 
later ones since experience may make available what was inaccessible 
and reveal what was hidden?” 
84. From this two things are to be noted: first, that a plenary council 
is made up of the whole church. The paragraph, /tem, para. Cum 
Petrus is to be understood in this way; namely, that a plenary council 
overrules every [other] authority. Secondly, it is to be noted that the 
universal plenary council may be deficient as to its knowledge of the 
facts. That several such councils erred in judgment appears in the 
letter sent by Augustine to Eleusius and Glorius and others on the 
side of Donatus,'* as well as in other places. Thus in all these things 
the opinion of Ambrose is correct that secret meetings are corrected 
'0Mansi 16, p. 86. 
"PL 33, 340 and 43, pp. 128ff. 
WAL, Ties ia), Taw 
'S The quotation is also from Book 11 of Against the Donatists (PL 43, pp. 128ff.). 
SPL 33, pp. 162ff. 
62 


[PDF page 115]
Book Il, para. 85 
by universal ones, following the teaching of Augustine in On Christian 
Doctrine, Book i, chapter 8, that the things that are universally 
accepted ought to be preferred to what is held by particular areas.'° 
You see now the authority of universal councils that are properly 
carried out. Hence Augustine in the first part of his sermon against 
the Pelagians says that the authority of Mother Church is such that its 
canon of fundamental truth is so firm that anyone who butts against 
this impregnable wall will himself be shattered.'° Augustine also says 
the same thing in the 11th book of Against Faustus,'’ and more quo- 
tations could be given on the subject but it is not necessary here. 
PL 34, p. 40. 1OPL 38, pp. 1335 ff. WADE os 0s 37.6. 
GHP Revit 
THESBRIER PORMVUSE DI BY DHE AN GIEN DS IN 
CELEBRATING UNIVERSAL COUNGIES: 
85. In summary, from the records of the councils we should note 
that universal councils were assembled by the emperors to discuss 
articles of faith, with the consent of the Roman pontiff and of the 
other patriarchs. The Holy Gospels, a piece of the wood of the Holy 
Cross, and other relics were placed in the middle of the meeting. All 
Catholic bishops and abbots were admitted, together with those 
laymen whom the representatives of the [episcopal] sees brought 
along and those whom the emperor himself wished to represent him 
or to be at his side. Matters were treated in different actions each day 
and settled in [public] sessions and each proposal was submitted in 
writing and read from a high pulpit. Matters of faith were discussed 
first and the synod heard the authorities quoted by each side, checked 
the original copies and opening sections of the books and the contents 
of the whole of the chapters quoted, to prevent the meaning of the 
quotation from perhaps having been altered by abbreviation. All of 
these things were carried out in good order, openly and publicly after 
a review both of the books and the quotations, and the synod issued 
its decrees in accordance with the testimony of the Scriptures. After 
this it went into questions of peace, the return of heretics, and the 
63 


[PDF page 116]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
settlement of questions between litigants by consent of the parties. 
Finally it concerned itself in formal judicial proceedings with those 
cases where an agreement among the parties involved had already 
been arrived at in the synod, so that there might be less possibility for 
an appeal. And at the end of each action a notary arose who spoke the 
praises of the emperor in many glowing terms, comparing him either 
to Constantine or Marcian and extolling his good works and zeal for 
religion. He also praised the five patriarchs and said that the senate 
and the synod would be remembered forever. 
86. At the end before the closing, the statutes were read in a loud 
voice by the bishops or metropolitans at the same time in the upper 
and lower sections of the synod. The closing followed with agreement 
to all the acts. The reason that the council had been called and a brief 
summary conclusion were inserted there, together with a profession 
of faith. Laymen and princes did not participate in the definitions of 
the faith but were present to advise and exhort and direct. Lastly the 
signatures followed which vary as to their order from one council to 
another, as also does the seating order. At the Eighth Council 
Emperors Basil and Constantine signed after the representatives of 
the patriarchal sees, followed by the other bishops, and the senate also 
declared that it accepted the synod and this was noted by notaries. 
More writings could be quoted on this subject, but it is not necessary 
here. Therefore let us move to other subjects. 
After these words let us consider the general councils which are 
often called universal, in order to show why many modern writers 
have been mistaken. 


[PDF page 117]
Book Il, para. &7 
CHAPTER VII 
SOMETIMES COUNCILS OF SEVERAL PROVINCES, OR 
A COUNCIL OF THE WESTERN CHURCH AND THOSE 
THAT ARE ATTENDED BY A PAPAL REPRESENTATIVE 
BUT ARE NOT COUNCILS OF THE UNIVERSAL 
CHURCH ARE CORRECTLY CALLED PROVINCIAL OR 
LOCAL COUNCILS. HOWEVER WHEN THE POPE 
PRESIDES OVER THEM THEY MAY SOMETIMES ALSO 
BE CALLED GENERAL OR UNIVERSAL COUNCILS, 
ALTHOUGH THEY SHOULD BE CALLED 
PATRIARCHAL COUNCILS. THERE IS DISCUSSION OF 
THE GENERAL OR UNIVERSAL COUNCIL OF THE 
ROMAN CHURCH OR OF THE POPE. IT IS ASSERTED 
THAT SUCH COUNCILS ONLY TAKE PLACE IN THOSE 
REGIONS SUBJECT TO HIS SEE AS PATRIARCH. THE 
CHAPTER DISCUSSES IN WHAT MATTERS AND HOW 
IT IS SUBJECT TO THE POPE, AND BY WHAT 
AUTHORITY IT EXISTS — AS WELL AS OTHER USEFUL 
MATERIAL ON ITS CONVOCATION AND THE SIGNING 
[OF ITS DECREES]. 
87. We also find that a council of some large province or of two 
provinces meeting together is often called a universal council, as in 
one case in Toledo as well as a certain council in Africa, which is 
mentioned above.' We also find that a council of the Western church 
is called a universal council — as St. Ambrose answers in the records 
of the Council of Aquileia to a heretic who objects that it is not a 
universal council.’ Hence although all councils except those of the 
universal church are called provincial councils as in D. 3 [c. 2] Regula 
or para. Porro — even when a representative of the Apostolic See 
participates, as it says in the same place, or when a patriarch partici- 
pates, as in the last action of the Council of Chalcedon which des- 
cribes as an action by a provincial council the deposition of 
Athanasius by the council of the Patriarch of Antioch when he did not 
appear after being called three times,’ — all councils other than the 
'The Fourth Council of Toledo (Hinschius, p. 364). On the African Council, see no. 71. 
“Mansi 3, pp. 1602ff. > Mansi 7, p. 314. 
6 on 


[PDF page 118]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
councils of the universal church are also called local councils. On this, 
see the text, [C.] 1 q. 7 [q. 4] Convenientibus, which quotes the Second 
Council of Nicaea and says that only seven universal councils pre- 
ceded it, the others being local in character. Although the Gloss says 
on that point that they were general councils because the represen- 
tatives of the Apostolic See were there,* nevertheless even if it is true 
that a council cannot be universal without the authorization of the 
Apostolic See, it does not follow that a universal council of the whole 
church takes place whenever the pope or his legate presides over a 
council. The Sixth Council of Carthage at which the papal legates, 
Bishop Faustinus and the priests Philip and Asellus, were present, 
and a certain council at Arles which some writers claim was attended 
by Theodore, the bishop of Dalmatia, and Agatho, the deacon, as 
legates of Pope Sylvester, and similar meetings are called provincial 
councils.> Thus Pope Leo writes to Emperor Theodosius, “May Your 
Grace [lit. —- Your Clemency] allow a universal council in Italy grant- 
ing my request and that of the synod which has met in Rome for this 
purpose.’”® Observe that a universal synod is sought in Italy from the 
emperor by the synod over which the pope presided, and this is to be 
noted. And the text of the 17th canon of the Eighth Council given 
below clearly proves this, when it distinguishes between the universal 
council and the one over which the pope presides as patriarch. 
88. Nevertheless the patriarchal council of the pope is often called a 
universal or general council, as is evident in the chapter [23] Antiqua 
of [the Decretals| De privilegiis [x, 5, 33] where the heading calls it 
“general” and the text “universal” although it is called “general” 
more often than “universal”. And similarly although a council of the 
universal church is properly called universal and this term is 
frequently used, at times it is called a general council. For instance, 
Pope Leo in the letter concerning the approval of the [decisions on] 
faith of the Council of Chalcedon which begins Omnium, calls 
Chalcedon a general council and Gregory, in D. 50 [c. 16] Quia 
sanctitas, calls all five universal councils, general councils.’ But on 
that, Emperor Constantine [III] when he writes to Pope Agatho con- 
*The Gloss to the Decretum was written by Joannes Teutonicus. The Decretum text refers 
to szxv universal councils. 
> Hinschius, pp. 308 and B2ie 
° Hinschius, p. 604. 
7Hinschius, p. 577. Pope Gregory’s letter is apocryphal. 
66 


[PDF page 119]
Book IT, para. 89 
cerning the Sixth Council says that he should send three persons 
from his church and twelve metropolitans from his council “to our 
general council”. In reply Agatho writes that he will obey as far as 
possible given the limited time and abilities of the province subject to 
him, and he says that he would have summoned the representatives 
and sent them more quickly except for the extensive area of the 
provinces over which his humble council was set. These things appear 
in the acts of the Sixth Universal Council.* 
89. From this we conclude that the pope like any patriarch has his 
own patriarchal council subject to him as appears in the same place in 
the first action in the chapter headed Piissimus.? And the northern and 
western parts of the church are in that council, as is contained in more 
detail in the same place. Agatho and his council write to Constantine 
[IV] as follows: “Bishop Agatho, servant of the servants of God, with 
all the synods subject to the council of the Apostolic See — to Con- 
stantine, the great Emperor, [and] to imperial Heraclius and 
Tiberius: The hopes of all good men seem fulfilled when His 
Imperial Highness faithfully seeks and earnestly desires to embrace 
the true faith, prized above all gifts, which comes from the One who 
has crowned him and set him to govern men well. It is a gift most 
pleasing to God from whom proceeds all that is good and to whom it 
returns in our acknowledgement of his majesty. By its spirit the 
radiant light of the holy will shines forth all around, penetrating secret 
places of the mind with a growing spiritual flame, and a sweet odor 
ascends from the sacrifice of the heart to the Lord who is pleased with 
this homage. May he grant him success in earthly matters and subju- 
gate all nations to him so that he may bring them to believe in and to 
know God. As subjects of the Christian empire may he free them 
from the power of darkness and make those happy who had been 
humiliated because unhappily he had permitted them to be cast down 
from their exalted positions.” 
“QO most holy and powerful of princes, august emperor, we admire 
and praise the pious and worthy proposal which you deign to direct 
towards our apostolic faith. It pleases God in a more subtle way than 
flowing words or false loquaciousness. Prompted by divine grace and 
without ambiguity you wish to know the truth of the orthodox and 
8Mansi r1, pp. 199 and 234ff. The Sixth Ecumenical Council, Constantinople III, was 
held in 680-681, and dealt with the Monothelite heresy. 
° Mansi 11, pp. 214ff. 
67 


[PDF page 120]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
apostolic faith. Therefore all of us, the humble leaders of the church 
and the servants of your Christian empire in the northern and western 
parts, limited in knowledge but by the grace of God firm in our faith, 
are overjoyed by what we have learned of the holy imperial command. 
With deep heartfelt emotion we have given thanks for this pious 
proposal to God, the creator and ruler of all things, who reigns and 
rules along with you. We believe that Your Highness [lit. — Tranquil- 
lity] wishes to carry out a work which is praiseworthy, marvelous, 
salutary, and more acceptable to God than any sacrifice. It has indeed 
been desired by many pious and just kings but only a rare few have 
carried it out in a way pleasing to God in the purity of the apostolic 
faiths 2° 
go. And below there follows in the style of another writer, “Fur- 
thermore we, your lowly servants, should explain to you, our most 
serene and gracious lord, the reasons for the delay in sending the 
persons from our council etc. whom Your Most Pious Highness in 
your sacred and most august letter commanded to be sent. First 
indeed is the fact that our numbers extend to the regions of the 
Atlantic Ocean, which is a great distance to travel. We hoped that 
from Britain our associate and fellow bishop Theodore, archbishop of 
the great island of Britain, as well as Philip and others who up to this 
time are delayed there would join our humble self so that at our lowly 
suggestion there might join us in a full council different bishops 
belonging to the council from various regions, so that all and not only 
a part would know what was done. In particular we know that situated 
among the nations of the Lombards and the Slavs, the Franks, the 
Galls, and the Goths or Britons are many of our fellow bishops who 
do not cease to be concerned to know what is being done on the 
subject of the apostolic faith. These can be of great assistance if they 
are kept in harmony in faith with us and think in agreement with us, 
but if — God forbid! — they were to be scandalized by the head of the 
faith, they would become hostile and contrary. But we, although most 
lowly, strive with all our energies that your Christian empire — in 
which the see of Blessed Peter, the prince of the apostles, was 
founded, the authority of which all Christian nations venerate and 
cherish along with us — may be shown to be exalted over all peoples. 
We have arranged for persons to go from our lowly position to the 
'0 Mansi 11, pp. 286ff. Heraclius and Tiberius, Constantine’s younger brothers, had been 
granted the title of Augustus by their father before his death. 
68 


[PDF page 121]
Book IT, para. 92 
court of Your Highness, who is protected by God. They are to offer 
the suggestions of all of us, that is, of all the bishops of the northern 
and western regions. We have also prepared the confession of our 
apostolic faith, not so as to dispute on uncertain matters but to put 
forward what is certain and immutable in a brief definition.”"! 
gt. From this it is clear that a general patriarchal council subject to 
the Roman pontiff was established in the northern and western prov- 
inces. Africa too is subject to the patriarchate of Rome — see D. 12 
[c. 11] Quis Nesciat where the provinces subject to the Roman see are 
enumerated. Hence Flavian, the patriarch of Constantinople, writing 
to Pope Leo says: “To all the devout bishops who have been 
established under your reverence, etc.’”’!* And on this, see also the 
letter of Leo to Theodosius which begins: Olim ab initio.’. The text of 
[C.] 2 q. 4 [5 c. 19] Jn omnibus also agrees with this where it says: “Of 
all of our bishops” as do D. 43 [93 c. 4] juxta, where it says, “All the 
bishops who are subject to the command of this Holy See” and a 
certain letter of Deacon Hilary to the Empress Pulcheria.'* Neverthe- 
less as is indicated in a letter of Pope Nicholas [I] to Emperor 
Michael, at that time [the bishop of] Thessalonica represented the 
Apostolic See in its authority over old and new Epirus, Illyria, 
Macedonia, Thessaly, Achaia, Dacia on the [Danube river] and on 
the Mediterranean, Mysia, and Praevalis.'° Thus the Roman 
patriarchate had the greatest part — practically the whole of Europe 
and a great part of Africa — under it. 
g2. But this patriarchal council has the highest privilege in that 
being called “the Roman church,” since it is united to the one Roman 
see, it never has and never will err on matters of faith. For it appears 
in the seventh action of the Eighth Universal Council that “what the 
Apostolic See has decreed in a regular synodal manner, ought to be 
more zealously embraced and more carefully observed, since you will 
know that this universal church has always held to what has been 
decided by that see, so that when individual errors arose in the 
church, it gave its decision first in accordance with its authority as 
primatial see, and the universal church then followed in the same way. 
"I! Mansi 11, pp. 294ff. Ries aeipad 276 
SPL 54, p. $23. "4 Mansi 6, p. 26. 
'STaffe, p. 2686. The dioceses enumerated included all of present-day Greece and 
Albania, the southern half of Yugoslavia, and a portion of the coast of Turkey, opposite 
Greece. 
69 


[PDF page 122]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
Although sometimes the universal church may have resisted it in 
certain matters for a time, it always finally approved what it had 
approved and rejected what it had rejected.”'® From this and other 
statements in the same place we conclude that the pope in his council 
ought to decide matters of faith with the unanimous agreement of his 
fellow-bishops. For it is said there: ““To our most holy brother fellow- 
bishops, who are deciding and deliberating together with us.” On this 
see D. 19 [c. 19] Anastasius and the Gloss on [C.] 24 q. 1 [c. 18] 
Loquitur. 
93. The fact that this council is called the Roman church is evident 
from the above. Also in the first action of the Eighth Universal 
Council where the legates of the pope say: ““Let the document be read 
which the Holy Church of the Romans has produced” and the docu- 
ment was read before the council. A similar passage appears in the 
sixth action in the chapter which begins: Multae quidem which says 
that Pope Nicholas pronounced an anathema in a synod of the whole 
church of the Romans. “This Roman church will always remain 
steadfast in the faith so that those who do not adhere to it are outside 
the Catholic church” is what appears in the first action according to 
the records of the same council in a document signed by all the 
participants.'’ We also read there a document which Pope Nicholas 
issued in the synod, which begins: “The first rule for salvation is to 
keep to the rule of correct belief, and then never to depart from what 
has been established by God and the fathers.” And further on: “And 
you cannot ignore the statement of our Lord the Saviour which says: 
“Thou art Peter and upon this rock, I will build my church.’ His words 
are verified by the results since the Apostolic See has always kept the 
doctrines of religion unstained.” And at the end: “... this see firmly 
possesses the whole truth of the Christian religion.”'*’ This was sent 
by [Pope] Hadrian to the Eighth Ecumenical Council of Constan- 
tinople and all subscribed to it as follows: ‘““We follow and embrace 
the holy synod which Pope Nicholas of happy memory celebrated 
before the most sacred relics of the great apostle Peter. You yourself, 
our angelic lord and supreme pontiff, have subscribed to it and have 
held a synod there as well, and we observe and venerate all the things 
which were decided in those matters by your wise decree, accepting 
16 Mansi 16, pp. r10ff. 
'7 Mansi 16, pp. 27 and 93. 
'8 Hinschius, p. 704. 
7O 


[PDF page 123]
Book IT, para. 95 
those whom you accept and condemning all those who are con- 
demned there.”'” 
94. Note two things: First, that the term, Apostolic See, is under- 
stood as meaning the whole Roman synod, and when it says that the 
Roman see cannot err it means by “see,” the whole synod. Secondly, 
it is to be noted that the see of Constantinople comes after that of 
Rome in making definitions, especially in matters of faith. And as was 
noted by the nuncio [apocrisarius| of the Apostolic See when he took 
care to bring the signatures and records of the council to Rome before 
the representative of the Apostolic See [at the council] arrived, 
Emperor Basil and the Patriarch Ignatius regretted the fact that the 
bishops of the see of Constantinople had signed as they did because 
the Apostolic See of Rome could argue from those signatures that it 
was greater than that of Constantinople since the professison of faith 
stipulated that they would follow the Apostolic See in all matters. 
Therefore the emperor saw to it that those signatures were taken away 
from the representatives of the Apostolic See by guards sent by him. 
Afterwards at the insistence of the [papal] representatives they were 
given back, and the emperor confessed that the Apostolic See was the 
teacher in matters of faith. And, as indicated above, so that there 
would be no danger of losing them the nuncio secretly took them 
along with the acts of the council to Rome ahead of the representa- 
tives — who were robbed of them on the way. The constancy of the 
faith of the Roman church is also proven in the first action of the 
Sixth Council and in many other places.”” 
g5. From this, two things are to be noted: First, that the universal or 
general patriarchal council is under, and subject to, the Roman pon- 
tiff, and this is seen in the documents signed by the legates of the 
pope and those of his council in the Sixth and Eighth Councils,”! 
since the signatures of the legates of the council follow [those of the 
papal legates]. D. 17 [after c. 6] Hinc etiam vy. Illud indicates this [as 
well]. Just as he [the pope] is first in matters of faith and is judge of 
the faith, as indicated above, so his council is first in matters of faith 
among all the patriarchal councils. And from this there is a second 
conclusion that the decision on matters of faith which is made by the 
pope and this council is the most certain of all the decisions of 
9 Mansi 16, p. 28. 
20 Mansi 16, p. 29 and 11, p. 215. 
*I Mansi 11, p. 667 and 16, p. 140. 
7p 


[PDF page 124]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
particular meetings, although the decision of a universal council of 
the whole church is more infallible and more certain. For we read in 
the first action of the Council of Chalcedon that Emperor Marcian 
says: “It is not safe to discuss a question of faith without a council of 
those in charge of the Sacred Scriptures throughout the world.”””* But 
today alas, the universal council of the Catholic church and the 
patriarchal council of the Roman see are the same, since the whole 
church has been reduced to a single patriarchate. Therefore since the 
decision of the Roman church, in the sense described above, has 
always stood as the true faith, so now the promise of Christ that the 
gates of hell will never prevail against it remains still more infallible 
and true. This is the second basic point that we wish to make. 
g6. I will say a word about the procedure utilized by the Council of 
Africa to assemble a council since it was also later followed by the 
Apostolic See.2> The location was fixed beforehand, and the 
metropolitans were informed as to the subject to be discussed. After a 
provincial council had met and the matter discussed the 
metropolitans sent one or two representatives of the province 
representing the whole (provincial) council to the meeting place. The 
Roman pontiff was frequently accustomed to convene a patriarchal 
council in the city [of Rome] and often outside it as well. Among those 
held outside the city at the time of Constantine was the Second 
Council of Arles, at which the legates of the Apostolic See and of 
Pope Sylvester were the priests Claudianus and Habitus, and the 
deacons Eugenius and Quiriacus, and we read that representatives 
were present from all of Africa, Mauritania, Sicily, Italy, Gaul, Spain, 
Germany, and all the other provinces under the patriarchate of 
Rome.** For we conclude from the acts of the Sixth Council that a 
synod or council of the Roman church takes place when representa- 
tives from its provinces meet at its command. Then as appears in the 
same place, the signatures of the others in the patriarchal council [of 
Rome] were affixed in the following way: First Agatho signed as 
follows: ‘I, Agatho, bishop of the holy, Catholic, and apostolic church 
of God in the city of Rome along with the whole council of the Roman 
see have consented to and signed the proposal contained above as the 
true apostolic faith.” And after that: “I, Andrew by the grace of God 
*2 Mansi 6, p. 598. 
*3 Hinschius, pp. 297, 307. 
*4The First Synod of Arles met when Constantine was emperor. 
72 


[PDF page 125]
Book II, para. 96a 
bishop of the holy church of Ostia, have likewise signed this resolu- 
tion which we have unanimously adopted as our apostolic faith.” And 
in that way, all [of them] sign in order. And there follows: “I, 
Adeodatus, humble bishop of the holy church of Toul, the legate of 
the venerable synod of the provinces of Gaul, have likewise signed 
this proposal which we have established unanimously as our apostolic 
faith.” And Wilfred, bishop of York, the venerable legate of the synod 
of Britain, signed in exactly the same way. And as it appears there, 
Felix of Arles and Taurinus, deacon of Toulon, were representatives 
of all Gaul in addition to Adeodatus and they all signed.*? From this 
you have the manner of calling a council and then of signing, and the 
fact that decisions are made by unanimous consent — which is particu- 
larly to be noted. There follows now a further difficulty on another 
question. 
g6a. [Basel Codex only.] Nevertheless we read that the council of 
the Roman patriarchate was often held outside of Rome, especially in 
Arles. Hence the following appears in chapter 18 of the Second 
Synod of Arles in which the legates of the Apostolic See and of all the 
provinces under it participated; “‘A synod is to meet at the decision of 
the bishop of Arles in which city, we read, a council made up of 
participants from all parts of the world was held and convened at the 
time of St. Marinus.’’*° And it was already defined before the time of 
Constantine and the other Caesars that a council should be held each 
year in Arles, which was called the city of Constantiniana. Thus there 
appears in the imperial command to the illustrious prefect of the 
Gauls, Agricola, which begins Saluberrima, after many other matters: 
“We command that a council be held every year in the city of Con- 
stantiniana. For it is so well-located, commerce so flourishes there, 
there is so much traffic in foodstuffs, that products of other regions 
are easily brought there. No other province enjoys the fertility that the 
soil of Arles seem to have. Indeed anything outstanding that the 
wealth of the Orient and perfumed Arabia, the delicacies of Assyria, 
the fertility of Africa, the beauty of Spain, or the strength of Gaul can 
possess seems to abound there, as if everything that is marvelous 
elsewhere were produced there. The southern flow of the Rhone and 
the northern flow of the nearby Durance are necessary to bring hither 
whatever the one or the other flows by or around. Whatever agri- 
*5 Mansi 11, pp. 298 and 306. 
26 Hinschius, p. 322 (A.D. 353). 
ie) 


[PDF page 126]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
cultural products may be useful for that city are brought there by sail, 
oar, wagon, land, sea, and river.... In that city we command that 
there be a meeting .. .””’ 
This is the reason that it was determined that the annual meeting 
was to be held in Arles. And these considerations should be respected 
in all meetings. And it happens that in the edict on the holding of 
councils there at the time of Bishop Marinus and Emperor Constan- 
tine we read that at the same time that the Council of Nicaea was 
being held the fathers met [at Arles] and decreed universal regula- 
tions even without the presence of the Roman pontiff or his legate. At 
the beginning of the record of that council it says, “The meeting of 
bishops who have been assembled in the town of Arles, to our most 
holy lord bishop, Sylvester: What we have decreed in common 
council, we signify to Your Holiness [lit. - Charity] that all may know 
what should be observed in the future ...”’’* Observe that by the 
authority of the councils to be assembled at the appointed place the 
fathers meeting together issued statutes to be observed by all. Note in 
particular that a properly assembled council can legislate with univer- 
sal force against a contumacious pope. 
However so that the form of a universal patriarchal council might 
be more perfect and as an indication of how the representatives of all 
the subjects of the Apostolic See were accustomed to meet together at 
the appointed place, note the form and signatures of another later 
Council of Arles which indicate that Pope Sylvester sent the priests, 
Claudius and Habitus, and the deacons, Eugenius and Quiriacus, and 
that legates were named from Sicily, Campania, Apulia, from the 
province of Dalmatia, from Trier, from Cologne, from Aquitaine, 
from Mende, from Bordeaux, from Toulouse, from Britain, from 
Romagna, from Andalusia, from Tarragona, from Saragossa, from 
Baza, from the province of Mauritania, from Sardinia, from Africa, 
and other provinces under the Roman see are listed along with all the 
legates sent — bishops, deacons, and exorcists — whose names for the 
sake of brevity I omit.”’ Suffice it only to know that legates from the 
*7 Imperial order from Emperors Honorius and Theodosius in A.D. 418 (printed in G. 
Haenal, Corpus legum, Leipzig, 1845, no. 117). 
*8 First Synod of Arles (A.D. 314), see Hinschius, p. 320. 
*°See discussion in Kallen, DCC, p. 129 and text in Hinschius, p. 321. Sylvester was not 
pope at the time of the Second Synod of Arles. 
74 


[PDF page 127]
Book Il, para. g6a 
provinces were accustomed to meet together in this patriarchal 
council — and from which provinces they came. 
For the sake of brevity I must omit discussion of the other provin- 
cial councils made up of one or many provinces, which also met in 
antiquity. It is not of great interest to us to discuss them here, since 
the point is clear. 
But we can see how much power is given to these synods by the 
Nicene Council since the synod is to govern and administer every- 
thing in the province and appeals are made to it, as is done in the 
letter of the Council of Africa to Pope Innocent and in C. 9 q. 2 [c. 9] 
Non invitati. For when Innocent intervened in African affairs to 
absolve those who had been excommunicated in Africa the fathers in 
the Council wrote back that no definition of the fathers [in the univer- 
sal council] had withdrawn this power from the African church, and 
the Nicene decrees clearly committed the lower clergy and the 
bishops to their metropolitans, for they saw it as most prudent and 
just that matters should be settled in the areas where they had arisen. 
The providence of the Holy Spirit would provide, they wrote, wise 
and firm justice for everyone from the priests of Christ, especially 
since if anyone was dissatisfied with the decision of the judges he was 
permitted to appeal to the council of his province or to a universal 
council — unless perhaps anyone believed that God could inspire one 
individual to carry out a just judicial procedure but deny it to vast 
numbers of priests meeting in council? This text is to be noted 
because it says that the pope should not put himself above the judg- 
ment of the [universal] council and also that a provincial council can 
appeal to it. Nevertheless note what the Archdeacon says on this 
subject when he discusses D. 18 [before c. 1] Episcoporum and D. 17 
[before c. 1] Generalia*' and observe that after the gloss on the chap- 
ter, Episcoporum it says that difficult matters cannot be decided in 
provincial councils but must be settled by the pope. 
3°L etter to Pope Celestine, Mansi 4, p. 516. 
3!The Gloss referred to is on D. 17, C. 1, Constituendum. The Archdeacon is Guido de 
Baysio, author of the Rosarium, an important commentary on the Decretum. 


[PDF page 128]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
CHAP EER SVIRI 
THE AUTHORITY OF GOUNCILS DOES NOT DEPEND 
ON ITS HEAD BUT ON THE COMMON CONSENT OF 
ALL. 11 IS DECLARED THAT THE MANY SIGNATURES 
TO THE AGLS OF THE COUNCIESS? RO Viv LA TEE 
POPE DEFINES AND LEGISLATES ON THE BASIS*OF 
CONSENT [OF TEE OTHERS] NOW MERE EY OR DHE: 
AD VIiGE Ab Mba SBiS HOPS eAiRsE as) Wl) Grbns AUN) 
AUTHORS OF CONCILIAR DEFINITIONS AND 
LEGISLATION, AND THEIR SIGNATURES SHOULD 
STRENGTHEN AND CONFIRM THE ACTS OF THE 
COUNCILS: 
g7. And to raise another serious problem — always subject to correc- 
tion — there is a question as to whether statutes that are adopted in 
universal or other councils where the pope is presiding, either per- 
sonally or through a legate, are adopted by the authority of the pope 
himself with the advice of the council, or with the concordance of the 
council. For this we should look to the subscribing signatures on 
other subjects besides the matters of the faith about which Agatho 
speaks above, and thus we may draw our basic conclusions from these 
and other writings. First, I find that in all the universal councils of the 
universal church the legates of the pope signed in the same form as 
the others without any difference. Each bishop either says: “Assent- 
ing,” or “Consenting,” or “Decreeing,” or “Defining, I have sub- 
scribed.” The papal legates used the same form, and I say “the papal 
legates” because I do not find that the pope was present at the eight 
universal councils.' To prove that this is not in doubt I will quote a 
few excerpts from the acts of the Council of Chalcedon concerning 
the deposition of Dioscorus. When Dioscorus refused to appear after 
three warnings, Paschasinus, the legate of Pope Leo, said to the 
Council: ‘““We wish to learn from your holinesses what punishment he 
"Seven councils are generally held to be ecumenical: Nicaea (A.D. 325), Constantinople I 
(381), Ephesus (431), Chalcedon (451), Constantinople II (553), Constantinople III 
(680-681), and Nicaea II (787) The Eighth Council, Constantinople IV, is not 
recognized by the Eastern Church — but was useful for Cusanus’ argument, since it was 
the last Council (before Ferrara—Florence, 1438-1439) at which both the Eastern and 
the Western churches were represented. 
76 


[PDF page 129]
Book IT, para. 98 
deserves.” The holy synod said: “Let what is in accordance with the 
canons be done.” Paschasinus said: “Do your reverences command 
that we apply the canonical punishment to him? Do you agree or do 
you wish to do something else?” The holy synod said: “We also 
consent. No one disagrees and the will of the holy synod is 
unanimous.” Julian, the bishop of Hippo, said to the legates of [Pope] 
Leo, “We beseech your holinesses, since as representatives of the 
holy Pope Leo you have a more eminent place than the rest, to 
promulgate a just punishment against the contumacious person and to 
pronounce the sentence against him contained in the canonical 
regulations. All of us in the holy synod are in agreetnent with the 
sentence of your holiness.” Paschasinus said: “Let what pleases your 
excellencies be unanimously carried out.” Maximus, the bishop of 
Antioch, said: “We are all also in agreement with what your holiness 
thinks should be done.” After this the apostolic legates pronounced 
the sentence by which Pope Leo had deposed and condemned Dio- 
scorus, and they added: “Let not this holy synod hestitate to issue a 
decree in accordance with the canonical rules concerning the 
celebrated Dioscorus.” Anatolius, the bishop of Constantinople, and 
everyone in the council passed sentence saying: “I judge him to be 
removed from every priestly or episcopal ministry.’ Note that the 
apostolic legates at the council since they sit in the first place pass 
sentence first if the synod commands it, and after them each one does 
so according to his rank, and that the force of the sentence depends 
on the unity and agreement of wills. Note also that the sentence of 
deposition of Dioscorus adopted by the Apostolic See was reviewed 
again by the universal synod in a new citation of Dioscorus in 
accordance with the canonical rules — which should be kept in mind 
in what follows. This is the form for the universal councils. 
98. I find that the signatures of subscription of the Roman pontiffs 
in other councils were also given in the same form. Thus in the 
Council of Pope Martin [I] which preceded the Sixth Universal 
Council, I find that Martin signed as follows: “I, Martin, the bishop of 
the holy, Catholic, and apostolic church of the city of Rome, have 
signed this definition into law which confirms the orthodox faith and 
condemns Sergius of Constantinople and Pyrrhus and Paul.’ And 
this is the way that Maximus of the holy church of Aquileia signed 
* Mansi 6, pp. 1043ff. 
> Mansi ro, p. 1162. 
77 


[PDF page 130]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
confirming, condemning, and decreeing, along with 103 bishops 
using the same form. | find that the signatures were given in this way 
in the council at Rome over which Pope Gregory II presided at the 
time of Emperors Leo and Constantine the Younger: “I, Gregory, 
bishop of the holy, Catholic, and apostolic church of the city of Rome, 
have signed this, as adopted and promulgated by us.”* And bishops, 
21 in number, 14 priests, and 4 deacons signed in the same way. We 
read the same thing in the synod of Symmachus. We read in the sixth 
action of the council over which Symmachus presided in the time of 
King Theoderic that 218 bishops said: “In confirmation of the 
statutes of the holy fathers, we have expressly decreed ...” Sym- 
machus, bishop of the Catholic church, said: “Show a like unity 
however as to what should be done if anyone should dare to trans- 
gress or act against these decrees” and when the bishops had risen 
together and afterwards were seated again, they said: “If anyone 
should dare to infringe the prohibitions of this holy synod, if he is a 
cleric, let him be deprived of his office; if a monk or layman, let him 
be forbidden communion.” And below: “When they were seated, and 
silence was established, the whole synod said: If any cleric or monk or 
layman, whether of greater or lesser rank, presumes to contravene the 
decrees in the form put forward by us, let proceedings be carried out 
against him as a schismatic in accordance with the holy canons.” And 
they signed: “I, Caelius Symmachus, bishop of the holy Catholic 
church of the city of Rome have signed this, adopted by us at the 
inspiration of the Lord. I, Lawrence, bishop of the holy church of 
Milan, have signed this, adopted by us at the inspiration of the Lord. 
I, Eulalius, bishop of Syracuse, etc.” And everyone signed in the same 
way. And in the sixth action Pope Symmachus said that some statutes 
were to be reissued and certain ones corrected, and added: “Because 
God has granted your presence in my support, I believe that it is 
necessary that the matter be confirmed in a way appropriate to 
ecclesiastical authorities.” And he subscribed, “I, Caelius Sym- 
machus, etc. have signed what has been adopted by the synod and 
approved and confirmed by us.”° And everyone signed in the same 
way. 
gg. I find analogous signatures in the council of Pavia held by Pope 
Boniface against clerics living in concubinage.° Note that every 
+ Mansi 12, p. 264. > Mansi 8, p. 298. 
° Mansi 19, p. 314. (The Council was called in 1022 under Pope Benedict VUL.) 
78 


[PDF page 131]
Book IT, para. 100 
signature indicated consent and confirmation. This is the way it 
appears in the sixth chapter of the Council of Africa where Gen- 
nadius said: ““What has been said by all we should confirm with our 
own signature.” And all the bishops said, “‘So be it, so be it.” Also as 
we see at the end of the acts of the Eighth Universal Council, the 
representatives of old Rome said: “Because by the providence of God 
all church matters have been brought to a happy conclusion, we 
should confirm these things in writing by our own hand in order in the 
synod.” Therefore in order to indicate confirmation and consent and 
to reinforce all of what was formally concluded, the signatures of the 
bishops were affixed at the end in order in the synod.* The following 
is found in a certain Council of Toledo: “Concluding and confirming 
all these things with our signature” and thereafter: “I, Eugene, 
metropolitan bishop of Toledo, have signed giving my assent to these 
common decrees.” And the other bishops signed in the same way. 
Another council [in Toledo] at which Isidore was present, said: ““We 
confirm all these things with our own signatures so that they may 
endure.” And this is found at the end of all the councils. 
100. From this it follows that the signatures cited above prove that 
the force of canons adopted in council is derived not from the pope 
nor from the head of the council but only from a single concordant 
consent. The Nicene Council directed that heretics who returned to 
the faith should profess those decrees that had been adopted by 
common consent and no others see [C.] 1 q. 7 [c. 8] Si qui voluerint. 
And if sometimes it is found that the pope decreed something “with 
the advice” of the council [this usage never appears, however, in the 
ancient councils], this is to be understood as advice which was also an 
approval which is equivalent to consent. For there is no doubt that a 
provincial council cannot legislate on matters that concern the whole 
province without its head, the archibishop, who is judge of the prov- 
ince as the Archdeacon notes on D. 17 [before c. 1], Generalia, [C.] 9 
q. 3 ¢. 1 and 2, unless he does not wish to be present or cannot 
participate, for instance because he is dead, as is noted in D. 18 
[c. 10] Placuit. However statutes that are adopted in these provincial 
councils are not for that reason ascribed to the metropolitan with the 
consent of the council, but to the various learned men in the council 
who were the authors of the canons, as appears in the procedure in D. 
7 Mansi 3, p. 873. *Mansi 16, p. 188. 
’ Fifth and Fourth Councils (A.D. 633) of Toledo (Mansi ro, pp. 656 and 641). 
79 


[PDF page 132]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
16 [c. g] Sevta, para. Annotatio.'° And those canons were not based on 
the authority of their authors but on the fact that the counsel as well as 
the consent of the others concurred — which is proven by their 
signatures. 
10D) Toe. rd. 
CHAP APE Ra 
NO CANONICAL LEGISLATION IS VALID UNLESS IT 
HAS BEEN ADOPTED WITH EXPRESS OR TACIT 
CONSENT OR ON THE BASIS OF SOME OTHER 
GANON DIP OTHER DIREGTIVES TARE, TS SWUisD eB ran: 
INDIVIDUAL THEY ARE NOD GALLE DT EAWsS 
| CONSTITUTIONES| AND THEY ARE NOT BINDING 
EXGEPTIFROM AGGCEPTANCGE OP. AND PREVIOUS 
GONSENTDT TO LAE AUTHORIDY OF DE, DEGIS VAT OR: 
ror. It has been demonstrated above that the council derives its 
authority from the power of binding and loosing given to the church 
and to the priesthood by Christ, as well as from the fact that there is 
no doubt that Christ is present in the midst of those brought together 
in his name and the spirit of the Lord inspires those assembled 
together.’ The Nicene Council decided that the synod of the province 
is to decide the things that concern each province, [C.] 9 q. 2 [c. 8] 
Episcopi; [C] 3 q. 6 [c. 16] Neminem para. Illa. The same definition by 
the Nicene Council declares that it is to govern and administer every- 
thing [C.] 9 q. 2 [c. 9] Non invitati, and, as the paragraph //la cited 
above states, whatever arises within the province should be heard and 
finally decided by fellow members of the province. From this it is 
evident that since a council is established by consent, because where 
there is dissent there is no council, see D. 15 [c. 1] Canones para. 
Synodus, no more basic foundation for the canons can be discovered 
than that of concordance. For church canons can only be adopted by 
the church gathering called a synod or meeting. And therefore if 
anyone whether he be pope or patriarch, promulgates decrees that are 
"Matthew 18:20 and Acts 15:25. 
80 


[PDF page 133]
Book II, para. 102 
not in accordance with the church canons, those statutes cannot be 
called canons or church laws and they have no special binding power 
whatsoever except to the extent that they are confirmed by acceptance 
and use or consent or they agree with the canons. Hence the texts of 
Pope Leo concerning the letters of his predecessors, in D. 19 [c. 1] Si 
Romanorum, and those of Pope Damasus in [C.] 25 q. 1 [c. 12] 
Omnium, speak of decretals and letters promulgated concerning the 
teachings of the canons. 
102. Ido not wish to deny that by the authority and power of God 
who commanded us to obey those set over us and to be subject to 
kings,’ rulers have the power to legislate and command in accordance 
with the responsibility entrusted to them. But I say that the obligatory 
force of the statutes also requires consent through use and 
acceptance. The [church] laws of Africa would not have bound the 
Gauls if Charlemagne had not applied them to Gaul when he 
received them in two summary collections from Pope Hadrian and if 
Gaul had not then accepted them.’ Hence the [third] Council of 
Toledo, held in A.D. 627 when all had been converted to the faith 
from the Arian heresy, said: “We have subscribed with our whole 
heart and soul to the decisions of the holy councils of Nicaea, 
Ephesus, Constantinople, and Chalcedon, which we have heard with 
a most favorable ear and approve with true consent.’’* Notice that the 
synod says: “With our consent.” Another Council of Toledo says: 
“We decree that if anyone who knows the acts of the Council of 
Nicaea presumes to act otherwise and thinks that he need not follow 
that Council, he should be treated as excommunicated unless he 
mends his ways when he is corrected by his brethren.’* And it is 
frequently found in all councils that the canons of past councils are 
confirmed in order to renew their force, to show that they are agreed 
to and accepted, and to renew any canons that may have abrogated 
through non-observance. 
21 Peter 2:13. 
3PL 67, pp. 136ff. 
* Mansi 9, p. 987; Hinschius, p. 357. 
> Hinschius, p. 350. 
81 


[PDF page 134]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
GHAR AIENREX 
GENERAL STATUTES NEVER BIND PARTICULAR 
PROVINGES UNEES SSPE Ye ARE SAC GR Pil Dre Eus 
FORCE OF STATUTES DEPENDS RATHER ON 
ACCEPTANCE THROUGH USAGE AND CONSENT, SO 
THAT ONLY WHAT HAS BEEN PROMULGATED IN A 
COUN GIE TS °P ROPER [CANONICAL] LEGISLATION. 
103. In addition it is clear that since the direction of a province in all 
matters is up to its synod, no law is binding unless it is approved by 
the synod. For every law ought to be appropriate to the country or 
place and time, see D. 4 [c. 2] Erit autem [as well as] D. 29 in its 
entirety, and the synod of the province has to determine this — I am 
speaking of positive human laws. All binding obligations should be 
based on the authority of the Holy Scriptures, the statutes of the 
bishops issued in the councils, and the custom of the universal 
church. Everything else should be eliminated; see D. 12 [c. 12] Omnia 
[talia], which is a text of Augustine. Note that he [Augustine] excludes 
all other obligations. Therefore the binding force of particular 
statutes as they apply to subjects depends on usage and acceptance. 
Hence laws are confirmed in usage and approved by the custom of 
those using them, see D. 4 [after c. 3] Leges. And it is also true of the 
statutes of the Roman pontiff that they lose their force through non- 
usage. This is proved in the same place in the chapters [c. 4 and 6] 
Statuimus and Denique. 
104. And it should be known that church laws [constitutiones] are like 
common resting places [stationes]; see [Decretals 5 39] De Sententia 
Excommunicationis |c. 31] Inter alia — although Hostiensis says 
otherwise in his Summa on |Decretals 1 2| De constitutionibus unde 
dicatur.' And those laws are properly called canons that must be 
observed by all, as is said inc. 1 of [Decretals 1 2] De constitutionibus. In 
all the ancient books only those church laws are called canons which 
have been adopted by synods because although the metropolitan has 
the responsibility and care of the province, [C.] 9 q. 3 [c. 2] Per 
singulas, he does not have the power to issue general statutes for the 
' Stationes is a corruption of statuitio, “decision” or “determination.” Hostiensis denied 
that consent was necessary for church laws (constitutiones). See Kallen, DCC, p. 139. 
82 


[PDF page 135]
Book II, para. 105 
whole province, but he should constitute them, that is, legislate 
together with other suffragan [bishops], for God rejoices in this con- 
cord and is glorified in his members, see [C.] 9 q. 3 [c. 5] Archi- 
episcopus, as with one voice the Trinity is glorified in concord in the 
church, see the same chapter and question [c. 7] Nullus primas. For 
God is present where there is simple consent without deformity, as 
Pope Hormisda says in his letter to the bishops of Spain.” 
* Hinschius, p. 690. 
CHAPTER XI 
DHE DECREES OF THE ROMAN PONTIFF MUST AESO 
DERIVE THEIR FORCE AND BINDING POWER FROM 
USAGE AND ACCEPTANCE. OTHERWISE CHRISTIANS 
WOUL DSBESINGPERI Es THERE R ORE Sirk, LAWS 
AD OPTE DEBBY HE GOUNGILITAVE DHE GREAT BS i 
BINDING FORCE, AND THE REASON FOR THIS IS 
GIVEN. IN ADDITION WHAT THE CANON LAWYERS 
SAYSAB OUTST BEDE CREA LV Pal MOR SsO Fe rik 
APOSTOLIC SEE SHOULD BE UNDERSTOOD AS 
APPE YING TRO DEGREES) ADOPTED IN GOUNCIT OR 
AGGORDING, TO-THE CANONS: 
105. Although we ought to obey salutary papal [lit. — apostolic] 
commands, see D. 12 [c. 2] Apostolicis, and although we must admit 
that the Roman pontiff has legislative power from God, as the Gloss 
on [c. 13] Generali of [1, 6] De electione in the Liber Sextus notes, and no 
one can take this power from him, as is noted in the comments by the 
Archdeacon on D. 2 [c. 2], and those of Antonius de Butrio on 
[Decretals 1, 7] c. 1 De translatione — which should be understood, 
however, in a limited sense, as is explained at the end of this second 
book! — nevertheless, in order for his statute to be binding it is not 
sufficient for it to be publicly promulgated but it should also be 
accepted and approved in usage as we have said above. See also the 
'See no. 249. The Archdeacon (Guido de Baysio) and Antonius de Butrio (d. 1408) both 
defended unlimited papal legislative power. 
83 


[PDF page 136]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
comments on the heading of [Decretals 1 2] De constitutionibus, by the 
doctors who say that for a statute to be valid three things are necess- 
ary: authority in the legislator, the approval of the statute through 
usage, and its publication.? Thus we see that even at the beginning 
many apostolic statutes were not accepted after they were issued. The 
principle of interpretation for all these appears in D. 4 [after c. 6] Haec 
etsi which reads: “Although these have been established as laws, those 
who do not observe them are not guilty of a crime because they have 
not been approved by common usage. Otherwise those who did not 
obey them would be punished unjustly.” No one is said to ignore or 
break such a law or statute because the law is not operative. But if 
there is a law which has also been accepted, then anyone who does not 
observe it and will not submit his will to the reasoning of the law is in 
criminal contempt — although not if he is driven by passion or desire — 
as the Archdeacon says so well, discussing D. 81 [85 c. 5] Quicumque. 
106. From this we conclude that the statutes which have been adop- 
ted in synod are rightly considered as canonical because depending 
on its rank, the synod represents either a province or a kingdom or the 
universal church. Whatever is thus adopted in the synod carries with 
it both acceptance and confirmation, although its force grows with 
usage. Therefore all the laws that speak of the statutes of the Apos- 
tolic See, D. 19 esp. c. [5] Null fas, ought, I think, to be understood 
as speaking of the statutes of the synod of that see, as the text quoted 
seems to say — or at least of that see understood not as the pope alone 
but with the cardinals as well, who act today as the representatives of 
the whole Roman church and even of the universal church. 
107. Indeed the pope is said to be the spokesman of that see, 
because that see speaks through the pope. The letters of the Roman 
pontiffs are called apostolic letters that have statutory force because at 
some time the pope issued them with the consent of a synod made up 
of the metropolitans who came once a year to [his] see. Hence in the 
Synod of Toledo made up of all the bishops of Spain and Gaul in the 
year A.D. 627 in the reign of King Recaredus, the first chapter of the 
statutes after the chapters on the orthodox belief (since they were all 
coming back from the Arian heresy to the Catholic faith) reads as 
follows: “But now since peace has returned to the Church through 
the mercy of Christ let everything which the past canons prohibited be 
“The most frequently cited source of the requirement of confirmation through usage is 
the Decretum D. 4 para, Leges which cites “the custom of the users” as necessary. 
84 


[PDF page 137]
Book Il, para. 109 
restrained by a new binding force and let everything be done which 
they have commanded. Likewise let all the definitions of the councils 
remain in force as well as the letters of the synods of the holy bishops 
of Rome.” And in another council held at Toledo in the time of King 
Sisenandus, it says in ch. 17: “The authority of many councils and the 
decrees of the synod of the holy bishops of Rome describe the Book 
of the Apocalypse as written by John the Evangelist and they have 
decreed that it should be included among the divine books’”* etc. 
108. Note that the letters of the synod are called decrees. From this 
we conclude that the approval of books [of the Bible] which is 
ascribed to Pope Gelasius was carried out by a synod, as is contained 
in the third book of Burchard where it is said that seventy bishops 
were in that council.° The text, D. 96 [c. 13] Constantinus, also proves 
this. In addition the texts of Pope Nicholas and of Gelasius and others 
which say: “Decrees promulgated by the Roman pontiff on pain of 
excommunication for the correction of morals and discipline,” ought 
to be understood, says Hincmar, the most subtle archbishop of 
Rheims — who is praised by the same Pope Nicholas in [C.] 11 q. 3 
[c. 102] Excellentissimus — as concerning the decrees that have been 
promulgated — that is, those of the binding decisions of the sacred 
canons and of the Apostolic Synod, which is often called the Apostolic 
See, whose spokesman is the pope, which he manifests to the people.° 
This is the way that I understand D. 19 c. 1 and similar passages in 
the Decretum about which more will be said at a certain point below. 
And when they clearly refer to the pope alone, as has been said above, 
they must be understood as referring to statutes which have been 
accepted and confirmed in usage — which amounts to the same thing 
as legislation by a synod. For the practice of the universal church can 
be equated with the decrees of the bishops in council, see D. 12 
[c. 12] Omnis. 
109. Nevertheless I do not deny that the pope has always been able 
to respond, advise, and write when consulted, but I say this about 
statutes which have the force of canons and decrees which bind 
universally in the church. Whether today as a result of customary 
practice over a long period the pope can also legislate by himself for 
3 Third Synod of Toledo (A.D. 589) — see Mansi 9, p. 992. 
* Fourth Synod of Toledo (A.D. 633) — see Mansi 10, p. 624. 
> Burchard of Worms, PL 140, p. 175. 
°PL 126, pp. 384ff. 
85 


[PDF page 138]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
the universal church, I will not discuss for the present. Nevertheless I 
do say: Even if he could do this, it is not contrary to our position, 
which amounts only to saying that the authority to adopt canons does 
not depend solely on the pope but on universal consent. And against 
this conclusion no prescriptive right or custom can have any validity, 
just as it cannot do so against divine or natural law from which this is 
drawn as a conclusion. 
GEN PRAUE Reo 
THE FORCE OF CUSTOM PROVES THAT THE BINDING 
POWDhR OR STATUTES DEPENDS ONTGCONSEIND. Ln 1S 
GORREGD TO PQUADE THE LEGISTADIVE POW ERIOFR 
THE POPE AS CHAIRMAN OF THE UNIVERSAL 
GOUNGIL WITH THAT OF THE PRESIDING 
METROPOLITAN IN A PROVINCIAL COUNCIL. AND 
DRE REE ORE DHE Se: O PES RNEPAR EY yA WAYS = CrAuiL. ED 
ARCHBISHOP BY THE ANCIENTS. 
110. Anyone can see that it is true that the force of a law comes 
from the concordance of the subjects who are bound by it, by observ- 
ing the force of custom based only by usage. On the validity of custom 
see the discussion in D. 12 in its entirety and especially in D. 11 [c. 5] 
Ecclesiasticarum. Thus we respect what has been introduced by custom 
even when it is not known whether it had the consent of any ruler with 
the power to legislate. And even if the force of custom also depends in 
part on the tacit consent and permission of the superior, as is the case 
with many legitimately established customs including particular 
customs that are opposed to general binding human laws, it should 
not be said that the source of its force does not still come from usage 
and preceding consent. Even when it discussed the power of 
patriarchs, we see that the Holy Council of Nicaea argued from 
custom, see D. 65 [c. 6] Mos est and [c. 7] Quoniam Mos, saying: “This 
custom is like that of the Roman Church. Just as the Roman pontiff 
has power over all his bishops, so also the Church of Alexandria 
should have this power throughout Egypt on the basis of custom.” 
Thus it commanded that custom be considered in the case of the 
86 


[PDF page 139]
Book IT, para. m1 
power of patriarchs, see [C.] 9 q. 3 [c. 8] Conquestus. We also see how 
much power beyond the holy ancient observances the Roman pontiff 
has acquired from the usage and customary obedience of his subjects 
today. 
111. We wish one brief conclusion to be drawn and rationally 
proved from the above concerning the significance of the practice of 
signing conciliar decrees — that in the councils the Roman pontiff 
does not have the power to adopt general statutes which certain of his 
adulators attribute to him, i.e. that he alone has [the right] to legislate 
with the others acting in an advisory capacity. Rather the presiding 
role of the Roman pontiff is not very different in its effect in a general 
or universal council from the presiding role of the metropolitan in a 
provincial council. Indeed in a universal council of the whole univer- 
sal Catholic church, this presiding role possesses /ess authority to act 
than in a patriarchal council. In a patriarchal council, however, his 
role is correctly compared to, and equated with, that of the 
metropolitan in a provincial council, as has been concluded above. 
Therefore among the ancients the Roman pontiff was often called an 
archbishop. In the universal council of the universal church, however, 
not as much power should be attributed to the presiding role of the 
Roman pontiff as is allotted to him in his patriarchal council or to a 
metropolitan in a provincial council, as will be explained below. 
87 


[PDF page 140]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
CHAP TE Ren 
ALL THE ARGUMENTS THAT MAINTAIN THAT THE 
POPE HAS THE PLENITUDE OF POWER FROM GOD 
AND SIMILAR POINTS ARE INVALID. THIS IS 
DISGUSSE DAD LENG I Ein DLP aE Sr Gils Eek 
ADMINISTRATIVE POWER BY SUPERIORS IS BASED 
ON THE SUBMISSION OF THOSE UNDER THEM SO 
THAT THE POWER OF SUPERIORS DEPENDS ON 
THEIR INPERIORS. LHISMS WORTHY OF NOTE 
PAPAL ADMINISTRATIVE POWER HAS THE SAME 
BASIS AS THAT OF BISHOPS BECAUSE ALL 
ADMINISTRATIVE POWER IN THE CHURCH COMES 
FROM ABOVE AND BELOW, SINCE THE PASTORIS A 
MEDIATOR BETWEEN GOD AND) HIS PROGK ALE DHE 
CONTRARY ARGUMENTS ARE ANSWERED PULLY, 
ONEVAR DE ReAN OF EEE Re 
112. This may perhaps seem novel to those who have read the 
writings of the Roman pontiffs arguing (1) that there is a plenitude of 
power in the Roman pontiff and that all others are called in an 
advisory capacity, see [Decretals 1 8] De Usu Pallii [c. 4] ad honorem, 
and (2) that Gelasius, Sylvester, and Nicholas, and Symmachus and 
other Roman pontiffs say that the pope judges all the other churches 
and no one judges him, (3) that since the power of the pope is divine, 
it is given to him by God in the words ‘‘Whatsoever you shall bind,” as 
Franciscus Zabarella notes in his Commentaries on [Decretals 1 2| De 
constitutionibus [c. 6] Cum omnes (4) that therefore he presides as the 
vicar of Christ over the universal church, see [Zabarella] Commen- 
taries on [Decretals 1 7| De translatione c. 1 and 2,' and (5) that since he 
has the highest power we find that he has judged and absolved the 
subjects of many bishops even when their bishops were not guilty of 
negligence and appeals are made to him without going through an 
'On the influence on Cusanus of Zabarella, a leading conciliarist at the Councils of Pisa 
(1409) and Constance (1414-1417) and a teacher of canon law at Padua before Nicholas 
studied there, see Sigmund, Nicholas of Cusa, pp. 110-113. The passages cited do not 
represent Zabarella’s own views. See also Thomas E. Morrissey, “Cardinal Zabarella 
and Nicholas of Cusa: From Community Authority to Consent of the Community,” 
MFCG, 17 (1986), 157-176. 
88 


[PDF page 141]
Book Il, para. 114 
intermediary. Pope Damasus in his letter to Stephen, the Archbishop 
of the Council of Mauritania, and to all the bishops of Africa which 
begins ‘‘When the letters from you, my brethren, had been read .. .” 
says that the pope has episcopal ministry over the universal church, 
the Roman church is the highest of the churches, and that any Roman 
pontiff takes the place of Peter as representative of Christ. He also 
says that in the metropolitan council cases ought to be discussed with 
the agreement of all but to decide “the most important cases or to 
condemn bishops is not permitted without the authorization of the 
Apostolic See which all ought to call upon if necessary for support 
and help. For a synod cannot be Catholic without its authority and a 
bishop cannot be definitively condemned except in a legitimate synod 
congregated at the proper time by Apostolic authority, and all other 
councils are not to be considered as ratified without authorization by 
the Apostolic See.” 
113. Similar statements are made by many Roman pontiffs. Fur- 
thermore because the power of legislation depends on the power of 
jurisdiction the Cardinal [Zabarella] notes in his statement on the 
chapter cum omnes that it is absurd to say that anything more than the 
will of the pope is required for a statute to have force. For what 
pleases the prince has the force of law. Besides there is no doubt 
about the statement of the doctors on the chapter [8] Cum accessissent 
and also on Cum omnes [c. 6] of [Decretals, 1, 2) De Constitutionibus, that 
the rector of any corporate body [universitas] has the exercise of 
jurisdiction although that jurisdiction itself also remains potentially 
[in habitu| in the corporate body. But no one doubts that the pope is 
also the master of the ship of St. Peter and of the universal church. 
Therefore the force of church laws depends on him since a corpora- 
tion cannot legislate without its rector.* 
114. Such things and others like them can be argued at length but 
to answer briefly, suffice it to say that they are all reduced to these 
basic principles — which can be answered. Arguing especially on the 
basis of those points [and] citing the actions described in his letter to 
all the bishops in Dardania, Pope Gelasius concluded that by ancient 
tradition the Apostolic See acting without a council absolved those 
unjustly condemned by a council and also that without a council it had 
* Hinschius, pp. 502ff (False Decretals). 
*On the significance of the power of jurisdiction, see Brian Tierney, Foundations of 
Conciliar Theory, Cambridge, 1955, pp. 31-33. 
89 


[PDF page 142]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
the power of condemning those who should be condemned. Never- 
theless — before I proceed — he was speaking of the condemnation of 
the heretic Acatius and the pope based his action on the action of a 
general synod which had condemned the heresy into which Acatius 
had fallen. It was as if the pope acknowledged that Acatius would not 
have been condemned by the Apostolic See without a synod if he had 
not fallen under the sentence of condemnation of the synod which 
condemned the heresy into which he fell, — as if the Apostolic See had 
carried out a sentence already passed — [C.] 24 q. 1 [c. 1] Acatius with 
the two chapters that follow [c. 2 and 3]. 
115. But to investigate the truth of this matter as to whether indeed 
as a matter of positive law all prelates below the pope have their power 
of jurisdiction by derivation from the pope himself, as the doctors, 
especially my Lord Franciscus Zabarella, assert regarding [Decretals 1 
2 c. 7] quam ab ecclesiarum — if this is true, Peter ought first to have 
received something special from Christ and the pope should be his 
successor in this respect. But we know that Peter received no more 
power from Christ than the other apostles, see D. 21 [c. 2] Jn novo 
[and] [C.] 24 q. 1 [c. 18] Loquitur. For nothing was said to Peter 
which was not also said to the others. Just as Peter was told, ‘““What- 
soever thou shalt bind upon earth” etc. Christ also said to the others — 
‘““Whatsoever you [plural] bind... .”’ And when Christ said to Peter 
“Thou art Peter and upon this rock,” etc., we understand the word, 
rock, as a reference to Christ in whom he [Peter] had confessed his 
belief. And if the word, rock [petram], is to be understood as a 
reference to Peter’s role as the foundation stone of the church, 
according to Jerome the other apostles were also foundation stones of 
the church. When these things are discussed in the next to the last 
book of the Apocalypse no one doubts that it refers to the apostles 
when it speaks of the twelve foundation stones of the city of 
Jerusalem. And if Christ said to Peter “Feed my sheep,” it is clear 
that this feeding is by word and example. Similarly according to St. 
Augustine’s gloss on the same passage, the same command was given 
to all [when Christ said] ““Going into the whole world” in the last 
chapter of Matthew and Mark.* Nothing else is said to Peter which 
implies any power. Therefore we are correct in saying that all the 
apostles are equal to Peter in power. 
*The scriptural passages quoted are Matthew 16:19; Matthew 18:18; Matthew 16:18; 
Apocalypse (Revelation) 21:14; John 21:17; Matthew 28:19; Mark 16:15. 
go 


[PDF page 143]
Book II, para. 116 
116. In addition it should be remembered that in the beginning 
there was only one general episcopate in the church diffused through- 
out the world without any division into dioceses, see [C.] 7 q. 1 
Novatianus Item episcopatus. For this reason c. 1 of [v1 17] De Trans- 
latione Praelaturae notes that it is not essential for the episcopacy that a 
bishop be attached to this or that place but it is sufficient for him to be 
a bishop of the whole church, as were Paul and Barnabus who were 
sent out generally to the whole church, see D. 75 [c. 5] Quod die 
dominico, as Hostiensis notes in his Summa on De Translatione — on 
which subject more is also said earlier in another place.’ Hence since 
the power of binding and loosing which is the basis of the whole 
jurisdiction of the church comes immediately from Christ, as Joannes 
Andreae notes in his comments on c. 1 of De renuntiatione® and see 
also [the Decretum| De poenitentia D. 1 [c. 51] verbum and similar 
statements, and because the power of jurisdiction is derived from that 
power of binding and loosing, it is evident that all bishops — and 
perhaps even all priests — are of equal power as to jurisdiction, 
although not as to actual execution. The exercise of executive power 
is kept within certain limits by positive law in order better and more 
peaceably to bring all men to their final end; namely, God, to which 
final end all power and jurisdiction and human statutes ought to tend 
by means proportionate to the time and the place. Hence when, on 
account of the negligence of those in the lower ranks or because of 
necessity, the reasons for the law that sets geographical limits and 
decrees that no one should enter into the territory of another no 
longer apply, those positive laws cease to bind. And we see that in 
times of necessity we go beyond human positive laws into the area of 
natural law, because in that situation any priest can absolve anyone 
from any sin, even someone excommunicated by the pope. Hence 
administration necessarily depends partly on positive law as to the 
grades of superiority and inferiority. The fact that to maintain unity 
there are separate dioceses and that a single bishop is established over 
the priests of each diocese is a matter of positive law, although this 
was done by the inspiration of God, see D. 93 [c. 24] Legimus and D. 
95 [c. 5] Olim. Therefore, following Hostiensis in his Summa on 
[Decretals 1| De Maioritate et Oboedientia,’ we say that all the bishops 
>See no. 48. 
®Joannes Andreae (d. 1348) wrote a standard commentary on the Liber sextus, the canon 
law collection issued by Boniface VIII in 1302. 
7On Hostiensis, see Brian Tierney, Foundations of Conciliar Theory, pp. 149-153. 
gi 


[PDF page 144]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
are equal in power and the higher offices such as that of archbishop, 
patriarch, and pope are administrative in character, as is stated in the 
Gloss on [D. 21 c. 2] Jn novo mentioned above as well as that on [C.] 2 
q. 7 Puto. 
117. But administrative rank which is derived from the possession 
of jurisdiction is established in part on the basis of the consent of the 
subjects. And so we say that an elected officer has ordinary jurisdic- 
tion over those who elected him by virtue of his administrative power 
over them. Thus on c. 1 of De renuntiatione in the Liber Sextus, it is 
observed [by Joannes Andreae] that the cardinals elect the pope in the 
name of the universal church and from the submission through them 
of the universal church to the one who is elected, the pope receives 
the administrative power together with the power of jurisdiction 
transmitted to him by election, which makes him pope. However I do 
not deny that the power of God is also involved, who authorizes and 
confirms their action, as is noted in the same place and discussed at a 
certain point below at the end of this second part.* On this basis it is 
clear that the jurisdiction which the Roman pontiff possesses is 
established by divine privilege and by election — as is that of the others 
who have ecclesiastical administrative power. Just as the hierarchical 
rule of the highest authority is established both by divine ordination 
and the election or consent of his subordinates, as appears in the text 
[D. 31 c. 2] Jn Novo which asserts that Peter was established as ruler 
by Christ with the agreement of the apostles, so also are the others 
who have administrative power. This administrative power is held to 
be distributed and ordered throughout the church, as Hostiensis 
notes in his Summa discussing [Decretals 1 7] De Translatione and the 
chapter [9] Pastoralis of [Decretals 11 10] De hits qui fiunt a praelatis and 
[C.] 13 q. 1 [c. 1] Ecclesias. Therefore we find the sole difference in 
the case of Peter is that he was chosen by Christ with the agreement 
of the apostles to have greater administrative power because he was 
older, as St. Jerome asserts in his first book against Jovinianus.’ 
118. However while the Roman pontiff is the principal successor of 
St. Peter, we cannot deny that all the bishops are also his successors. 
Peter was the first to have the pontificate over the apostles, as noted in 
the aforementioned chapter [D. 21 c. 2] /n novo, but since the episco- 
pate involves rulership over the priesthood as already indicated we 
® Book u, nos. 249 and 262. 
9PL 23, pp. 258ff. 
Q2 


[PDF page 145]
Book Il, para. 119 
have to say that all ecclesiastical power to rule exists by a kind of 
succession from the first ruler, namely Peter. And as Peter’s power to 
rule was derived from the fact that he represented Christ, so also in 
the case of the ruling power of the other bishops, as Anacletus says in 
the same chapter /n novo. ‘““Therefore he who hears them, hears 
Christ.” He does not say “He who hears them, hears the pope or 
Peter.”’'° Indeed all the bishops have an apostolic command to rule 
the flock over which the Holy Spirit placed them for the good govern- 
ance of the church. And they make decisions in the synod because 
they are the princes and rulers of the church. That the episcopal 
authorities who are chosen to be archbishops or primates are also the 
successors of Peter is evident from what Anacletus says in a letter to 
all the bishops and priests which begins: Benedictus deus. He says 
“The blessed apostles decided among themselves that the bishops of 
the various nations should know who was to be first among them, so 
that responsibility over them would be his. For there was also a 
certain difference of rank among the apostles and although all were 
apostles, it was granted to Peter by the Lord — and the apostles wished 
this to be the case — that Cephas, i.e., the head, should rule over all 
the other apostles and act as the foundation of the apostolate. They 
also prescribed this same form to be observed by their successors and 
the other bishops.”’!' See D. 22 [c. 2] Sacrosancta. Note that this form 
was transmitted by the apostles that as they had put Peter over them- 
selves, so also a primate ought to be established over the other 
bishops. Thus the primate succeeds Peter as the other bishops suc- 
ceed the other apostles and what is said of the primate ought also to 
be said of the archbishop — that he is a successor of St. Peter. 
11g. Certain modern writers say that Peter sent the apostles out to 
the individual provinces. They wish to conclude from this that the 
exercise of the power of binding and loosing was given by Christ to 
Peter and through Peter to the others. Pope Anacletus in the letter 
above does not say this. He says that the apostles were chosen by 
Christ and sent out at his command. The Roman pontiffs, especially 
Pope Symmachus and others, write that the Roman pontiff is judged 
by God alone,'* but does not Anacletus in a letter to the bishops of 
Italy which begins Quoniam apostolicae likewise say that the high 
'0 Hinschius, p. 79 (False Decretal) — Quoniam Apostolicam, n. 12. 
"IPL, 130, p. 78 (False Decretal). 
"See C. 9, 9.4 c. 14 and c. 13 (False Decretal). 
93 


[PDF page 146]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
priests, that is the bishops, are judged by God?!’ See also Pope Pius in 
[C.] 6 q. 1 [c. g] Oves. Hence whatever is understood to apply to the 
pope, e.g. that he cannot be judged by his subjects, also applies to the 
bishops. Similarly if a text says that the pope has the plenitude of 
power and others are called in an advisory capacity, we can also say 
this concerning any archbishop or patriarch as appears in the 
[introductory] paragraph to [C.] 9 [19] q. 3. 
120. Ifyou say that the pope looses and binds those who are subject 
to the bishops, I say the same thing is true of other cases when the 
consent of the proper bishops is given. For an act which otherwise 
would be invalid is rendered valid in a given case with the consent and 
agreement of the appropriate member of the clergy, see [C.] 9 q. 2 [c. 
10] Lugdunensis, and the chapter [c. 6] Nudlum, and the chapter [c. 7] 
Episcopum. Since therefore this practice has been introduced by com- 
mon usage and consent is given through usage, it is obvious that its 
efficacy comes from consent. Hence since no one is obligated to obey 
except as authorized in a canon, see [C.] 18 qr. 2 [c. 1] Hoc Tantum, 
and [C.] 9 q. 3 [c. 8] Conquestus and since no canon of any council can 
be found [that says] that the pope can do this when a case is not 
appealed to him, the matter ought to be resolved through custom, 
usage, and consent. For canon law gives the pope no power to violate 
the jurisdiction of bishops, since this would be a disturbance of order, 
see [C.] 11 q. 1 [c. 39] Pervenit — at the end, igitur etc. 
121. We do not read that the Roman pontiffs of old intervened in 
these matters and granted confessional and similar rights and perhaps 
it would not have been allowed. The decision of the Council of Africa 
to which St. Augustine agreed did not allow an appeal from a synod to 
the pope because this was not allowed in the canons.'* On the con- 
trary it was defined by the Council of Nicaea that a case should 
terminate in the synod where it began, as appears in [C.] 6, q. 4 [c. 5] 
Si quis episcopus criminaliter which includes the letter of the same 
council to pope Zosimus.'* Likewise they refused to recognize the 
text, [C.] 2, q. 6 [c. 36] si episcopus, ascribed to the Council of Sardica, 
which allowed appeals and provided that the legate of the pope was to 
be sent to the province, as we see in the same letter and in the letter 
written to Pope Boniface by the same council. They even said that 
'S Hinschius, p. 76 (False Decretal). 
'* The Council of Carthage (A.D. 419) — see no. 71. 
'S Hinschius, p. 311 prints a similar letter by Pope Zosimus. 
O4 


[PDF page 147]
Book II, para. 124 
they had not found it in any council, although Faustinus, the legate of 
the Apostolic See, said that the text was that of the Nicene Council 
and in the place mentioned above it is said to be that of the Council of 
Sardica.'° How could they have taken these positions then and 
allowed the outrageous things which are being done today? But 
because consent and long usage have now introduced this practice, 
these things are useful for the salvation of souls as long as they are 
tolerated. However they can be repealed by the council, and this 
reform is necessary. 
122. If you go on and argue from the papal power to dispense from 
canons to a power to legislate, you are proving nothing, for a bishop 
and priest can dispense from the penitential canons, see [C.] 27 q. 6 
[c. 2] Tempora poenitudinis and a bishop from other penal canons, see 
D. 50 [c. 22] Si quis presbyter; [C.] 1 q. 5 last paragraph; [C.] 9 q. 2 [c. 
10] Lugdunensis. And a dispensation does not revoke the canons, see 
[C.] 9 q. 1 [c. 5] Ordinationes, and q. 2 [c. 10] Lugdunensis and the 
argument of D. 50 [55] c. [1] Priscis. Hence the argument proves 
nothing. 
123. And what is said about the [powers of a] rector, is no objection 
since if a corporate body cannot legislate without its rector, the 
exercise of jurisdiction being his, the converse does not follow — that a 
rector can legislate without the corporate body which possesses a 
potential power [to legislate]. Nor is it correct to argue from [the 
power of] jurisdiction since the power to legislate, although it is linked 
to that of judging, does not follow from it. Not everyone with the 
power to judge has the power to legislate, although everyone with the 
power to legislate can make judicial decisions. Thus we say that every 
synod of the fathers because it has the power to adopt laws, has the 
power to make judicial decisions as well. 
124. Hence it is clear from the above that the binding power of the 
canons is derived from consent, for unless we could argue validity 
from usage and a law could be abrogated by not being observed, there 
would be no salvation. Who can know in what ways our teaching has 
been added to, or changed from, that of the Four Councils!’ without 
©The Council of Sardica (A.D. 343) — today’s Sofia — was boycotted by the bishops of the 
Eastern church. Its canons were once believed to be those of the Council of Nicaea, and 
were thus cited by Pope Zosimus in his letter to the Council of Carthage in 418. See 
Hamilton Hess, The Canons of the Council of Sardica, Oxford, 1958. 
'71_e., Nicaea, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon. 
95 


[PDF page 148]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
our incurring condemnation, or when certain sacraments were intro- 
duced in the councils, or how we could evade the numberless 
penalties of automatic excommunication, deposition and the like con- 
tained in the canons, if in all of these matters concord and consent, 
usage and non-usage, did not help us? Hence in chapter 1 of the same 
Council of Toledo it is said, “If any earlier decrees have been neglec- 
ted, let them receive a new binding force so that because we devote 
our attention to the religious observance of matters relating to the 
practice of the faith which have been decreed in the councils but have 
fallen into disuse over time, we may more easily obtain the mercy of 
God.”'* Note that decrees that have been ignored lose their binding 
power and they acquire it again when they have been accepted once 
more. Thus long-standing customs approved by the consent of those 
who observe them are similar to law, see D. 12 [c. 6] Diuturni, and 
where a legal authority is lacking, the customs of the people and the 
practices of one’s ancestors are observed as the law, see D. 12 [D. 11 
c. 6| In his. 
Indeed the statutes of the synods are based on this type of consent. 
Hence Pope Gregory [I] in professing his belief in the Four Councils 
says that since they were constituted by universal consent, anyone 
who presumes to loose those whom they bind or to bind those whom 
they loose, acts to his own destruction, not that of the statutes. For a 
synod makes its definitions by the authority of all, not only of those 
who are present, as Gregory says when he declares that the statutes 
adopted by the bishops who were present representing the others, 
were adopted by universal consent.'’ Hence at the end of the Council 
of Toledo, we read: “If however anyone of us or of those in the 
province who are not present now in the sacred synod should dare to 
violate this sacred decree or neglect to comply with it devoutly, let him 
be excluded for a time from the community of brotherly love.”’”’ By 
the above reasoning, if the others who are concerned with the council 
have been summoned to it, those who are present are considered to 
act as the representatives of all. And this is proved in the eighth canon 
of the Second African Council, discussed below, where it is said that 
the representatives grant full authority to the council in the name of 
the others.”! 
'8 Second Council of Toledo (Mansi 8, p. 784). 
PL 77, p. 478. 20 Mansi 8, p. 787. 
*! Third Council of Carthage, c. 2 (Mansi 3, p. 787). 
96 


[PDF page 149]
Book I, para. 126 
125. And there is no doubt that both the universal councils of the 
whole church and those of the kingdoms of Spain, the Gauls, and of 
Africa, as well as of an individual province have always been able to 
legislate for themselves — just as Boniface writing to Rusticus of 
Narbonne says that the fathers who were assembled in Nicaea adop- 
ted canons for themselves, that is for the whole world or the universal 
church which they represented there.”” We read in the records of the 
council held at Rome in the ninth year of the reign of Emperor 
Constantine III under the chairmanship of Pope Martin with 105 
bishops in attendance that to show that Pope Leo’s message had been 
approved by the Council of Chalcedon Pope Martin said at the begin- 
ning, “The holy Council of Chalcedon, that is to say the assembly of 
all the holy fathers, made this definition. For what one synod of the 
holy fathers is seen to decide, all the synods and all the fathers 
together confirm in indissoluble harmony in one and the same 
expression of faith.”** And just as a provincial synod when it meets 
decides on the canons necessary for the province, so if the seven 
provinces of Gaul were to meet they could legislate for the seven 
provinces. And if all the provinces in the world were to meet, just as 
any one province can provide for itself so all together can legislate by 
common agreement on all matters. And it is surprising to say that all 
of them gathered with full power as representatives cannot do what 
any one province can do for itself. But there is no doubt that any one 
province can provide for its needs without the pope. Therefore all of 
them can so provide, provided that following the normal procedure 
the pope or anyone else belonging to the synod is not excluded, if 
willing and able to come. For a synod of many provinces has more 
authority than that of one, as is said in the following chapter. 
126. And although we insist that the pope is not the universal 
bishop but the first over the others, and we base the force of the holy 
councils not on the pope but on the consent of all, at the same time 
since we defend truth and maintain the rights of everyone, we rightly 
give honor to the pope, see D. 99 [c. 5] Ecce. 
*2 Boniface I to Hilary, Bishop of Narbonne (PL 20, p. 773). 
23 Mansi 10, p. 875. 
97 


[PDF page 150]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
QEUAP ADE RISD) 
ALL LEGISLATION IS BASED ON NATURAL LAW. 
SINGE BY NATURE WE ARE ALL EQUALLY FREE, ALL 
COERCIVE POWER IS DERIVED FROM THE ELECTION 
AND GONSENT OF THE SUBJEGTS “THE 
JURISDICTION THUS CREATED IS NOT VALID IN 
ITSELF UNLESS IT IS IN AGGORDANCE WITH THE 
LAW AND CANONS. THIS IS A FINE OBSERVATION. 
127. In order for everyone to be better convinced, I add another 
consideration to these arguments. Although one might wish it to be 
developed at greater length, in the interests of brevity and to please 
the reader I will limit myself to a summary discussion. All legislation 
is based on natural law and any law which contradicts it cannot be 
valid, see D. g [after c. 11] Cum ergo and [D. 10 c. 4] Constitutiones. 
Hence since natural law is naturally based on reason, all law is rooted 
by nature in the reason of man. The wiser and more outstanding men 
are chosen as rulers by the others to draw up just laws by the clear 
reason, wisdom, and prudence given them by nature and to rule the 
others by these laws and to decide controversies for the maintenance 
of peace, as is contained in D. 2 [c. 5] Responsa prudentum. From this 
we conclude that those better endowed with reason are the natural 
lords and masters of the others but not by any coercive law or judg- 
ment imposed on someone against his will. For since all are by nature 
free, every governance whether it consists in a written law or is living 
law in the person of a prince — by which subjects are compelled to 
abstain from evil deeds and their freedom directed towards the good 
through fear of punishment can only come from the agreement and 
consent of the subjects. For if by nature men are equal in power 
[potentes| and equally free, the true properly ordered authority of one 
common ruler who is their equal in power cannot be naturally 
established except by the election and consent of the others and law is 
also established by consent. See D. 2 [c. 1] Lex, [and] D. 8 [c. 2] Quae 
contra where it says “An agreement of every race and city among 
themselves” etc. and “There is a general agreement in human society 
to obey their kings” etc. Note that for the convenience of human 
society men wish to make a general agreement to obey their kings. 
98 


[PDF page 151]
Book II, para. 130 
Since in a properly-ordered government an election of the ruler ought 
to take place by which he is set up as judge of those who elect him, 
rightly-ordered lords and rulers are established by election, and 
through election they are established as general judges over those 
who elect them. As I have noted elsewhere, this follows Hostiensis in 
his Summa and other doctors.! 
128. And because they are general judges, appeals can be made 
from them to the highest authority, because they were not specifically 
elected to have the final decision in every case. But if judges are 
chosen in a particular case by the parties involved, appeals are not 
normally allowed as the tenth canon of the Council of Africa states: 
“Certainly if judges have been chosen by consent of the parties, even 
if by a smaller number than prescribed [by the law] there should be no 
appeal,” see C. 2 q. 6 [c. 34]. A judge ought to decide in accordance 
with justice, so that a sentence is legally invalid if it is pronounced in 
violation of laws and canons, see [Decretals 2 27] De sententia et re 
judicata c. 1 with the cross-references mentioned in the Gloss on that 
passage. 
129. Moreover we do not read that the Apostolic See ever made a 
decision that was contrary to the canons, as is noted in the letter of 
Pope Boniface to Zacharias which begins Confitemur’ and in many 
quotations given below. Yet the papal decision is reviewed once more 
by the plenary council, as is stated below on the basis of the works and 
authority of Augustine.* But such a review would be in vain if every- 
thing that the Roman pontiff wished were law because then it would 
be impossible for him to act against the law. Hence it is proper that 
his judgment should be limited by the canons, to which he is subordi- 
nate and in accordance with which his decision is reviewed in order to 
determine whether it does or does not follow them. 
130. Furthermore the canons are based on natural law. Even the 
ruler has no power to violate natural law, and therefore he also has no 
power over a canon based on, or incidentally following from, natural 
law. And because this is the case, how can we say that it is in the 
power of a judge to adopt canons and statutes? If this were so, if he 
"Book 1, no. 117. 
* Third Council of Carthage (Mansi 3, p. 882). 
3PL 130, p. 1,163, written in A.D. 742 by St. (not Pope) Boniface, the Apostle of 
Germany. 
* Book u, no. 149. 
99 


[PDF page 152]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
himself had the power to make the canons, a judge could not be 
charged with an unjust decision, since the decision would be the law, 
and therefore it would always be just. But because law ought always to 
be reasonable, possible, and not against the custom of the country, see 
D. 4 [c. 2] Erit autem, we cannot call something a law which is not 
accepted by the usage of the users — whether in the civil or canon law, 
see D. 4 [c. 3] Leges, and chapters which follow. Hence if approval 
through use is required of laws as is said in the chapter, Leges, it 
cannot be right to condemn someone as guilty for violating a new law 
because he could not violate something which did not yet exist. ‘Thus 
he must have broken a law that has been adopted and accepted in 
custom and usage. And from this it is clear that the law or canon is a 
standard for every judge, and that any judge who makes a decision is 
subject to all the laws and canons. 
131. Furthermore, if it is true that a canon is approved by agree- 
ment, usage, and acceptance, then the strength of all legislation 
comes from acceptance. Hence the canons of the common council are 
rightly called those of the church. For the church is a congregation. 
One person cannot properly issue church canons. Thus we see that 
canons are issued in the councils by harmonious acceptance, consent, 
and subscription, but the decretals of judicial decisions of the Roman 
pontiffs or those on doubtful points in new situations have been 
confirmed as just, not out of pure authoritative will [of the pope] but 
because the canons agree that those decisions should be made, — a 
point which ought to be noted. This is the way I understand D. 15 
[c. 3] Sancta Romana para. Item decretales, and D. 19 [c. 6] In canonicis 
along with similar passages, and there is more on this subject 
elsewhere, especially at the end of this Second Book and at the 
beginning and end of Book m1. 
100 


[PDF page 153]
Book II, para. 132 
GHAPTER XV 
ON THE BASIS OF WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ABOVE WE 
GAN SAY THAT JUST AS THE BISHOP SHOULD NOD 
PEGS AE Wish HOW His Gi AP. DEIRIIN ORG dT Hib 
METROPOLITAN WITHOUT HIS SUFFRAGAN 
BISHORS SO HEP ORESHOULRDENOD TSS UE 
UNIVERSAL STATO LES APEFE GING ALE ELMES 
SUBJECTS WITHOUT HIS CARDINALS. NO 
[CONCILIAR| DECISION WSFsEINAL UNE SS i Es 
RAGITE TE DEBBY THE PAP OS TOLLE SEE SIN GE APPEALS 
HAVE BEEN MADE TO THE ROMAN SEE FROM ALL 
DOGTRINAL DEEINIDIONS — EVEN THOSE BY 
SVNODS *— 3b GEP Oh ORMDHOSEOP DEE ONIV ERS AG 
COUNCIL OF THE UNIVERSAL GHURGH. HOW THIS 
COMMON DICTUM IS TO BE UNDERSTOOD IS ALSO 
DISCUSSED: 
132. From the above it is now clear that the binding force of every 
law consists in concord and tacit or express consent which is given 
either through usage or by the action of those with others under their 
authority, because they represent them or rule over them. For just as 
the bishop and his chapter are said to make up the diocesan church 
because that gathering potentially contains all the others who belong 
to the same church so that they are all considered to be represented 
by them, so also a metropolitan and his suffragan bishops constitute 
the church of a province and a patriarch with his metropolitans, the 
church of a patriarchate. Hence the authority of any gathering 
extends to all represented in potentiality in that gathering. We say that 
according to ancient practice the Roman church was made up of the 
pope and his associated metropolitans since each year they used to 
meet with him as the head of their patriarchate. And because as a 
result of the agreement of the metropolitans and by universal practice 
the cardinals of the various regions have become their representatives 
and take the place of all, both in electing the Roman pontiff and in 
advising the universal Roman church, we are justified in saying that 
the Roman pontiff can take no action in any matters affecting the 
universal Roman church without the cardinals, and that if he should 
IOI 


[PDF page 154]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
do anything without them, it cannot be accepted with impunity. It is 
true that this power belonging to the cardinals to represent the tacit 
consent of the universal Roman church needs to be reorganized so as 
to enable them to act as representatives who give its express consent. 
This is treated in another place.' 
133. From the above it is also easy to understand what is often 
asserted by the Roman pontiffs; e.g., by Pope Damasus in a letter to 
Stephen, the Archbishop of the Council of Mauritania,’ as well as 
other Roman pontiffs in D. 17 [c. 2] Regula, — that no synod is valid 
unless it is confirmed by the authority of that Apostolic See — since 
they are speaking of the [Roman] see. It is true that no synodal 
decision is certain in which the Apostolic See does not participate 
because there is always the possibility of an appeal from the decision 
of that synod to the Apostolic See. Thus we read that the cases of the 
Patriarchs Flavian and Ignatius and others in Constantinople and 
Athanasius in Alexandria were appealed to the Apostolic See.’ Hence 
if a synod has condemned anyone, including a patriarch, the decision 
of that synod is not ratified until it is confirmed by the Apostolic See 
since it can be appealed to that see. And when it is said that by itself 
without a synod, the Apostolic See can reinstate those unjustly con- 
demned in a synod, this is true, if [by “without a synod”, we mean] 
without a meeting of the universal synod of the whole church. For if 
someone is condemned by a patriarchal synod, whether of Constan- 
tinople or Alexandria or some other large provincial synod in France 
or Spain, the Apostolic See which, as has often been said, is made up 
of those comprising and representing the Roman church as outlined 
above, has a higher jurisdiction and can take judicial cognizance of 
what has been decided by the synods. Thus we read that Pope 
Nicholas in his Apostolic See assembled in synod examined the case 
of Ignatius who had been condemned by Photius. Pope Martin acted 
in this way in the case of Pyrrthus and Sergius, as did Pope Julius 
before them in the case involving Eusebius and Athanasius of Alexan- 
dria.* This is how we read that they acted in all cases. 
134. Hence it is true that the Apostolic See is superior in jurisdic- 
tion to all synods except the universal council of the whole church of 
which that see is a part, and that therefore it can review the decisions 
of all lower synods without action on the part of the council of the 
Book m1, no. 191. 2 See Book 1, no. 112. 3See Book u, no. 76. 
*PL 119, p. 1073; 87, pp. r19ff.; 8, p. 879. 
102 


[PDF page 155]
Book Il, para. 135 
universal church. For example in the sixth action of the Eighth 
Council in the answers of Metrophanes, bishop of Smyrna, to the 
arguments of Zacharias of Chalcedon concerning the absolution 
granted to Apiarius by the Roman church contrary to the decision of 
the Council of Africa, we read that it was not accepted [at first] in 
Africa and that later the decision of Pope Zosimus in his synod to 
absolve Apiarius who had previously been condemned in the synod of 
Africa was finally accepted.” However he was not admitted to his 
former church on account of the possibility of scandal but letters of 
recommendation were given to him by the synod so that he might act 
as a priest in all the other churches. And note this case on account of 
certain points related to this subject which are discussed above and 
below. 
135. And on the same point, note the letter of Pope Boniface to 
Bishop Eulalius of Alexandria on the topic of the reconciliation of the 
Africans which says that at the time of Boniface and Celestine, 
Aurelius of Carthage and his colleagues rose up in pride at the 
instigation of the devil against the Roman church but that now all 
professed [belief in] the document of the synod held at the time of 
Justinian, beginning, Prima salus, which you have above. And 
although there is much that is worthy of note in that letter — as when it 
says so well at the beginning that the church contains a hierarchical 
concordance of inequality on the model of the heavenly army in which 
all are subordinate to one first [ruler], i.e. the Roman pope — it seems 
hard to say, as it does, that Valerius and his colleagues were in error, 
because 216 bishops including Augustine agreed as one to its deci- 
sions which they also signed in writing, as is noted above. And if they 
were later led to the recognition of the rights of appeal and jurisdic- 
tion belonging to that see, it should not be said that they were in error 
earlier unless this means that the African church itself was in error in 
not accepting the legislation of the Council of Sardica, since, as is 
mentioned at a certain point above, Augustine did not consider that 
council Catholic but Arian.’ Nevertheless because the whole church 
accepted its decisions, as is clear in the actions of the Eighth Univer- 
sal Council,® the Africans were also obliged to accept those statutes as 
Catholic without considering those who did the legislating. However 
the Council of Sardica adopted a statute in honor of the memory of 
> Mansi 16, pp. off. © Book 1, nos. 93 and 121. 
7St. Augustine, Contra Cresconium (PL 43, p. 516). 8 Mansi 16, p. 71. 
103 


[PDF page 156]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
St. Peter which provided that one could appeal to the Bishop of 
Rome. It was proposed and moved by Hosius, Bishop of Cordoba, the 
legate of the Apostolic See, and this is discussed in C. 6 q. 4 [c. 7] 
Quod si aliquis which is to be noted carefully. This text proves from 
the decision of the synod in honor of the memory of St. Peter, that the 
Roman pontiff has the power to judge local councils but only in the 
form set down there, i.e., he can approve a decision but cannot 
disapprove one except by means of a new synod — so that that text 
proves that the administrative power of the pope depends very much 
on positive law and the consent of the synod. 
136. You may perhaps say that the legislation of the universal 
council of the universal church must also be ratified by the authority 
of the Apostolic See, i.e. the Roman pontiff, to be valid. | admit that in 
the case of legislation on matters of faith it is true that unless the 
authorization of the Apostolic See is secured, the laws are not valid. 
Indeed the consent of the Roman pontiff himself must also be given, 
since he is chief-bishop of the faith. This is also true of all other 
church laws because they receive their force from the agreement of 
the synod and even the lowest-ranking suffragan bishop in a provin- 
cial synod or canon in an episcopal synod or metropolitan in a 
patriarchal synod is essential to his synod because its validity depends 
on the agreement of all. Pope Damasus, for example, argued that the 
Council of Rimini was invalid for this reason, for Vincentius who was 
bishop for a long time, and other bishops did not give their consent.’ 
Indeed I think that no one doubts that an act which otherwise has the 
essential form required is invalid if this is not observed. Therefore I 
would think that if the pope is assembled with his cardinals as 
representatives of the provinces, as I have touched upon elsewhere, 
and even one cardinal is missing they should take no action on any 
universal statute for the whole Roman church. There is no doubt 
[that this is true] of the head of the synod, i.e. the metropolitan in the 
patriarchal synod, and the pope in general or universal synods. Hence 
just as a decision of a synod can be contested if anyone who is 
supposed to be present is not permitted to participate while willing 
and able to do so, since it violated the proper order of charity, so also 
with even more validity for the head [of the synod]. 
137. Itis not true however that the legal authority of a synod which 
7 PL 03, P2340. 
104 


[PDF page 157]
Book Il, para. 138 
has been properly called and is carried out according to correct 
procedure with those in attendance that ought to be admitted, is also 
so dependent on its head that unless he consents to a decision, no 
decision can be made. For this would then imply that it would not be a 
decision of the synod but only of one man. And since anyone who 
goes to a synod is bound to submit to the decision of the majority 
because he assumes that normally the majority rules, the synod finally 
makes its definitions with the agreement of all in deciding by majority 
vote even if the opinions of particular persons may differ. Neverthe- 
less no conclusion, especially on a matter of faith, can be certain 
unless the vote is made unanimous as was the case, we read, in all the 
councils. And with this interpretation we think we can satisfy anyone 
who wishes to understand correctly the authorities whom the Roman 
pontiffs cite in their letters. I say, the Roman pontiffs, because I could 
find very little in the records of the councils on all these subjects 
which did not fully agree with the positions that I have taken above. 
GEN Bai xevel 
FROM THE SIGNATURES APPENDED TO [CONCILIAR] 
DEFINITIONS WE CONCLUDE THAT BISHOPS HAVE 
THE POWER TO MAKE DEFINITIONS, BUT OTHERS 
INCLUDING ABBOTS AND MONKS ALSO GIVE THEIR 
CONSENT AND SIGN — LAYMEN ALSO DO SO BUT AS 
AUDITORS AND WITNESSES. ALSO CLERICAL 
EXPERTS [PERITI] NOT IN ADMINISTRATIVE 
POSITIONS SHOULD NOT BE EXCLUDED FROM THE 
COUN GIES: 
138. Since the question has arisen as to which persons should be 
admitted to the council and also who should be allowed to sign its 
decrees, we should consider that although the Egyptians who came to 
Chalcedon from Alexandria with Dioscorus raised this question along 
with others in the Council of Chalcedon and, as appears in the acts of 
that council, repeatedly claimed that a council is made up of bishops 
and that the others ought to be excluded, we do not read there that 
105 


[PDF page 158]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
non-bishops were excluded for this reason.' In the Fifth Universal 
Council we read that everyone down to the rank of lector signed,’ in 
the Sixth and Eighth Councils that priests and monks, the emperor 
and the senate and deacons signed, and that they were always 
accepted in the sessions and in the signing at the place where their 
superiors were located, as is indicated in D. 93 [c. 26], Praecipimus 
which contains the text, and in D. 94, c. 1.5 However in the Sixth 
Council of Constantinople where the signatures of Pope Agatho and 
his council appear, we do not read that anyone besides bishops and 
their representatives signed the definition [of dogma]. Hence the 
power of definition and legislation has perhaps always belonged to 
bishops de jure, see D. 12 [c. 12] Omnia where the text says that 
statutes ought to be adopted in councils of bishops, and although 
others summoned such as abbots and monks also sign, we read that 
this is not generally done with the power to make dogmatic definitions 
on which see [C.] 1 q. 7 [c. 4] Convenientibus. Hence when a universal 
council speaks on matters of faith, I wonder why, since lay people are 
allowed to enter, non-bishops ought not be admitted — and not merely 
in an advisory capacity — but to legislate and sign, if they are at least 
qualified and knowledgeable. But in other matters, where a decision 
is made not by unanimity but by majority vote, discretion and 
prudence and authority ought rightly to lead us to consider whether 
the judgment of fools whose number is infinite might not outweigh 
the votes of the wise.* 
139. Hence I do not think that the laity or clergy should be admitted 
indiscriminately, but I think that qualified learned churchmen should 
be included in making decisions since the common good of the 
church is being sought and it does not matter from what source it 
come, providing only that it is found. But as appears below, we read in 
the seventeenth canon of the Eighth Universal Council and in D. 96 
[c. 4] Ubi nam that lay people were admitted to the universal council 
when a question of faith was to be defined, and subscribed to the 
other acts in the council as witnesses. Thus we read in the Fourth 
Action of the records of the Eighth Council. ‘““The most excellent 
' Mansi 6, p. 602. 
Mansi 9, pp. 38off. (Only bishops signed at the Second Council of Constantinople, A.D. 
553.) 
3Mansi 11, pp. 667ff. and 682ff., and 16, p. 19go. 
* Ecclesiastes 1:15. Note this limitation on earlier discussions of majority rule (no. 137). 
106 


[PDF page 159]
Book IT, para. 139 
senators and glorious princes said to the council through the patrician 
and president, Bahanes: ‘Our holy emperors have sent us, his servants 
who make up the senate, which by the will of God is honored in every 
way, so that we might act as auditors of what is done. Therefore if you 
wish to ask us for our signatures at the end of this holy universal 
synod, as is proper for a synod, all my brothers and fellow patricians 
say through me, the unworthy servant of our holy emperors, to our 
most holy lord, the patriarch, and to the most holy representatives of 
old Rome and those of the eastern sees: Unless we have heard in 
person both from Photius and from his bishops and in front of us that 
their mouths are closed because of the precepts of the canons and the 
synod, our hands will not sign one word of that synod. Let them hear 
what has been decided by Pope Nicholas in the Synod of Rome and if 
they say nothing in reply, the schism will be healed by their submis- 
sion. But if this is not done, we know that you would not want us to 
sign at the end of our actions etc.’ ’” Note that the laity since they are 
to sign as witnesses in the council can demand what reason and 
justice requires from the council in order for them to sign properly. 
And this should suffice on that subject. 
> Mansi 16, p. 55. 
107 


[PDF page 160]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
CHAPTER XVII 
A PATRIARCHAL COUNCIL IS NORMALLY NOT 
SUPERTOR®LO THE POPE BUDS SUBIE GER DOVHIM, 
UNLESS HE DEPARTS PROM DHE, RATE: 
NEVERTHELESS IT CAN CORRECD HIMUIN THESS Ave 
WAY THAT A PROVINCIAL COUNCIL CAN CORRECT 
ITS MEDROPOLITANYT THE, GOUNGID OF THE 
UNIVERSAL, GHURCGH [SINOT ONEY OVERS T HEP OPE 
BUT IPTS ALSO GLEARIAY SUPERIORS OFS SYNOD, 
AND TO eLHOSE OF ALL fH E OTHER TPADPREAR GH st 
THE ARGUMENT IS ANSWERED WHICH IS USUALLY 
MADE THAT THE ROMAN SEE IS OVER THE WHOLE 
CHU R GH BYS tHE GRANT OF (GE RIDS Ds Willies Aey |) EAS 
DESPITE CHRIST’S GRANT, FOR THE GOOD OF THE 
UNIVERSAL CHURCH THE UNIVERSAL COUNCIL HAS 
JURISDICTION AND SUPREMACY OVER THE PERSON 
WHOrOGCUPIES THAT SEE WHEN HE ABWSES HES 
POWER. EXAMPLES ARE GIVEN. 
140. From what we have said above a sufficient answer can easily be 
given to the supposedly difficult question as to whether the universal 
council is indeed above the pope. For the universal or general 
patriarchal council, as we always read, is subject to the Roman pontiff. 
This is evident from the above and from what follows, and is defined 
in the sixth chapter of the Council of Nicaea referring to the see of 
Alexandria and other sees, see D. 65 [c. 6] Mos, and all the councils 
after this say the same thing. Therefore in the case of this universal 
council [i.e., the patriarchal council], I think that it is true that the 
Roman pontiff cannot be judged by the council unless he is in error 
on [a matter of] faith since as long as he remains in the faith he 
remains as its head. Therefore he cannot be judged by a lower power 
because he has the power of all the others, as the definition in the 
sixth chapter of the Nicene council says. In addition he remains the 
head, in the unity of the Catholic church which is [a unity] in faith, of 
the other patriarchs in all the rest of the church. Therefore it is 
correct that as a metropolitan he cannot be judged by his synod unless 
he is in error on [a matter of] faith, as is defined in the roth canon of 
108 


[PDF page 161]
Book IT, para. 141 
the Eighth Ecumenical Council’ and note in [Decretals m 5] De 
prebendis, [C. 29] Grave, and in [C.] 11, q. 1 [c. 46] Sz clericus — on 
which the Archdeacon comments that a metropolitan since he is head 
of the provincial council cannot be punished by that council.” Hence 
Pope Anacletus in a letter to all the bishops which begins, Benedictus 
Deus, says, ““The teacher and shepherd of the church if he should 
depart from the faith ought to be corrected by the faithful. However 
for bad conduct he is rather to be tolerated than coerced.’ And he 
understands by the faithful, his subjects, as is evident in the text 
immediately following. And it is clear why this should be understood 
this way, for the shepherd of the church cannot be corrected by the 
church which is his flock of sheep, but if he is not in the faith he is not 
the shepherd and then he should be corrected with anathema and 
withdrawal of obedience. 
141. And there is no doubt concerning the case of condemned 
heresy since he falls under the sentence of already condemned hereti- 
cal teaching, as Pope Gelasius wrote to Emperor Anastasius and to all 
the bishops in Troy concerning Acatius. For he says, “The universal 
church in observance of the ancient law considered that all those who 
held an already condemned heresy were refuted once it was con- 
demned, just as the Nicene Council included all Arians in its con- 
demnation of Arius.”* But if a heresy has not [already] been 
condemned, then, according to the tenth canon mentioned above, one 
should not withdraw from him until it is formally established that he is 
a heretic.” However a pastor can be corrected privately by those under 
him for an error in faith and he can be denounced to his superior. 
Hence Pope Fabian in his letter to the eastern bishops which begins, 
Exigit dilectio, says: “If a bishop should deviate from the faith, he 
should first be corrected privately by his subordinates. But if it 
appears that he cannot be corrected (may it never happen), then he 
should be denounced to his superiors or to the Apostolic See. But in 
his other actions he ought to be tolerated by his subjects rather than 
denounced.’”® But if he is a heretic, then since he is excommunicated 
'Mansi 16, p. 166. 
*Guido de Baysio held that the metropolitan council could judge its head (Kallen, 
p. 176). 
Hinschius, p. 85 (False Decretal). 
*PL 59, pp. 44ff. and 62ff. 
> Mansi 16, p. 166. 
© Hinschius, p. 166 (False Decretal). 
109 


[PDF page 162]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
ipso facto for that heresy rather than because of any positive law 
because he is a heretic on account of error in the intellect and 
obstinacy in the will, he has separated himself from the whole body of 
the church, as Saint Cyprian says in [C.] 1 q. 1 [c. 70]: If anyone, he 
says, has left the church in the presumptuousness of heresy, he has 
condemned himself, see [C.] 4 q. 5 c. 1; [C.] 24 a. 1 cc. 1, 2, and 3. 
142. Everyone, even a simple layman, is also obliged to separate 
himself from that heretic and by that separation he says anathema 
upon him. In this way we read that the laity in the council declared 
publicly condemned heretics to be anathema and also individuals 
outside the council declared heretical Roman pontiffs anathema. 
Thus superiors and those in higher office when they are heretics are 
said to be deposed by their inferiors when they separate themselves 
from them on account of the anathema that comes as a result of 
heresy. 
143. Hence since his exercise of his administrative duties as 
superior ceases because of the withdrawal of obedience and because 
the ruling office of a bishop, primate, or pope consists in the exercise 
of administrative duties, when that ceases they are rightly considered 
to be deposed, as Joannes [Andreae] in his Novella notes on chapter 1 
of [1 7] De renuntiatione of the Liber Sextus. When it is clear that a pope 
does not wish to carry out his administrative duties then he is con- 
sidered to have already given up the papacy since the papacy consists 
in the exercise of administration, as is noted in D. 21 [c. 2] Jn novo 
and [C.] 2 q. 1 [c. 35] Puto. The exercise of administration ceases 
once the obedience of all has been withdrawn because of heresy. 
Therefore the papacy also ceases to be located in its material subject; 
namely, the heretic. In this way we read that Popes Liberius and 
Marcellinus were deposed by separation and withdrawal of 
obedience. So also any patriarch, including the patriarch of Rome, is 
deposed indirectly by his former subjects if he falls into a condemned 
heresy. This is the way in which I think the following relevant pro- 
visions of canon law should be understood: D. 40 [c. 6] Si papa; D. 17 
[c. 6] Hine etiam; D. 21 [c. 4] Inferior, and the chapter Nunc autem 
[c. 7] and similar provisions. 
144. Nevertheless although a metropolitan may not be judged by his 
council, as is contained above, he can be corrected by it. This is 
proved by the text and heading of [C.] 2 q. 1 [c. 46] Sicut inquit, and 
by [C.] 9 q. 3 [c. 6] Si autem and the chapter Salvo [c. 4]. In the same 
110 


[PDF page 163]
Book I, para. 145 
way, I would think that the general council of the Roman see can 
correct the pope, in accordance with the same text which says that the 
head of a council should be corrected by his council. On this point 
[D.] 18, [before c. 1] Episcoporum is useful which proves that a 
council, although in a given case unable to make formal definitions, is 
able to correct and reform its head in accordance with the ancient 
canons. On this point there does not seem to be any doubt in the case 
of the canons of the universal councils of the Catholic church involv- 
ing automatic excommunication, since all Catholics are obliged to 
observe them, as will be discussed more fully below.’ In the case of 
the authentic punitive legislation of those councils and all other 
statutes of any other councils, it is clear that they do not apply to the 
pope unless he has formally bound himself to observe them. And the 
same thing should be said for other patriarchs and archbishops — if 
they violate a statute of automatic excommunication adopted by a 
higher authority, they can be corrected even in their own councils by a 
declaration that the statute applies [de incidisse], in a way similar to 
what has been said about the pope — but otherwise only by way of 
exhortation. 
145. But I do not think there is any doubt that a universal council 
properly understood, that is, one that represents the whole Catholic 
church, is over the patriarchs and the Roman pontiff. Hence although 
we read in various places that the power of the Roman pontiff comes 
from Christ, it also appears in many places that the primacy of the 
Roman church over all churches comes from the decisions of the 
apostles and their successors, as appears in [C.] 3 q. 6 [c. 9] Dudum. 
And the judges in the Council of Chalcedon, when the question of 
the primacy arose between the churches of Rome and Constantinople 
ordered the canons to be produced and decided that according to the 
canons old Rome had the primacy, as D. 17 [after c. 6] Hinc etiam 
says. And likewise although we find in the records that the pope is 
described as the vicar of Christ, we also find it said that he takes the 
place of, and represents Peter, see [C.] 2 q. 7 [c. 4] Jn sancta. And 
much can be said regarding the different expressions used in similar 
passages. For some bishops called the pope their “‘associate,” as did 
Optatus, others their “fellow priest,” as did Ambrose, and the fathers 
in the Council of Ephesus, and the Council of Turin, and some 
7 Book u, chapter xx. 
III 


[PDF page 164]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
“brother,” others “bishop,” some “archbishop,” or others 
“patriarch.” 
146. But it is enough for us [to conclude] that although the Roman 
pontiff as successor of Peter has received great privileges from Christ 
and possesses high power derived from his see and cathedra — privi- 
leges that are associated permanently with that see — the primacy 
which the Roman pontiff exercises over all the churches comes partly 
from men and the canons, as is said above. Pope Anacletus says that 
while Peter was established as prince of the apostles by Christ, it was 
done with the consent of the apostles, see D. 22 [c. 2] Sacrosancta; D. 
16 [after c. 6] Hinc etiam; C. 24 q. 1 [c. 15] Rogamus; [C.] 7 q. 1 [c. 34] 
Mutationes. And the text of D. 99 [c, 2] Nu//i proves this when it says 
that the primates were established by the apostles and their suc- 
cessors. The Gloss says that the primates are those of Rome, Alexan- 
dria, and Antioch, see D. 21 [c. 1] Cleros etc. 
There is no doubt that the patriarch of Antioch has succeeded to 
the see of Peter, but he does not possess the primacy by virtue of this 
since the patriarch of Antioch defers to the patriarch of Rome. 
Therefore Pope Marcellus in a letter to the inhabitants of Antioch 
which begins: Sollicitudinem omnium says, “If your church in Antioch 
which once was first has yielded to that of Rome, there is no church 
which is not subject to its authority. To it as head all bishops who wish 
to do so can have recourse and can appeal.”” Hence in the synodal 
letter of Leo LX to Peter, the Patriarch of Antioch, he writes, “From 
the fact that your apostolic see is consulting ours, we conclude that 
[you in] your prudence do not wish to depart from the decree of the 
Lord and all the holy fathers by which the apostolic see of the holy 
Roman church is established as the inviolable head of all the churches 
in the whole world to which the more important and difficult cases are 
to be referred by other churches for decision. This has been pro- 
claimed by all venerable councils and human laws, this the Holy of 
Holies Himself, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, confirms — that 
the venerable summit of ruling authority and of all church discipline 
should be located in the place where Peter, the very center and chief 
of the apostles, awaits the blessed resurrection of the flesh on the last 
day. Surely he alone is the one for whom Our Lord and Saviour 
declared that he prayed that his faith would not fail, saying: ‘Simon, 
*See PL 11, p. 949, 16, p. 1004, and Mansi 5, p. 1070, 3, p. 861. 
°PL 7, p. 1093 (False Decretal). 
I1i2 


[PDF page 165]
Book II, para. 149 
Simon, behold Satan has sought that he might sift thee as wheat. But 
I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not and that thou being once 
converted should confirm thy brethren.’ And the result of this 
venerable and efficacious prayer has been that until now the faith of 
Peter has not failed and we believe that it will not fail on the throne of 
Peter until the end of time. Rather he will strengthen his brethren 
when they are shaken by various trials of their faith, as until now he 
has not ceased to strengthen them.”!! 
147. Hence I do not think that the universal council would ever 
wish to take away those privileges of the primacy from the Roman see 
as they have been defined by other councils. [Pope] Leo says the same 
thing in answer to the claims of Michael of Constantinople in chapter 
36: “Whoever attempts to destroy or diminish the authority and 
privileges of the Roman church plots the subversion and destruction 
not of one church but of all Christianity. What other mother will give 
mercy and sustenance to her daughter under oppression if that one 
mother church has been crushed? ‘To what refuge will they appeal? 
With whom will they have shelter? For that church received, protec- 
ted, and defended Athanasius and all the Catholics, and restored 
them to their own sees after they had been driven out.”'” 
148. But because those who sit in that see are human beings subject 
to error and sin, and especially because at present with the world 
moving towards its end and evil on the increase they abuse their 
power using what was granted for the building up [of the church] to 
destroy it, who of sound mind can doubt that without any diminution 
of the true power and privilege of that see the universal council has 
power both over abuses and over the one who commits them — to act 
for the preservation and the well-ordered rule of the whole church? I 
believe that it is wrong to say that the universal council also cannot 
take judicial cognizance of, and make decisions concerning the 
primacy of the Roman church for we read in the records that the 
Council of Chalcedon expressly involved itself in this and passed 
judgment on it.'’ Hence it can be said in general that a universal 
council that represents the Catholic church has power directly from 
Christ and is in every respect over both the pope and the Apostolic 
See 
149. And many conciliar actions and canons and proofs from reason 
107 uke 22:31. INP Ie 143, p.77o- 
Pl 143, p. 767- 'S Mansi 7, pp. 354ff. 
113 


[PDF page 166]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
support this opinion. For the dispute over the primacy which took 
place in the Council of Chalcedon proves this; as does the definition 
by the Nicene Council which was produced in the same Council of 
Chalcedon in defense of the Roman see, and also the fact that the 
actions and judgments of the Roman pontiff even in his synod are 
often reviewed and examined in the plenary councils. The Council of 
Chalcedon reviewed the decision of [Pope] Leo against Dioscorus 
and the Sixth Council reviewed the decision in synod of Pope Martin 
against Pyrrhus and Sergius, and the Eighth Universal Council 
reviewed the decision of Popes Nicholas and Hadrian against Photius 
— and there are many similar cases.'* Hence Augustine in his letter to 
Glorias and Eleusius which begins Dixit quidem apostolus, after he has 
discussed the decision of 70 bishops against Cecilianus and noted 
that that decision was reversed by Pope Miltiades and certain other 
bishops sent by Emperor Constantine, says that those who opposed 
the decision of Pope Miltiades and his associates said that they had 
supposedly suffered a decision by biassed judges. ““This is the excuse 
of all bad litigants when they have been refuted by the obvious truth. 
Could it not properly be said to them on this point: ‘Let us assume 
that the bishops who made the decision in Rome were not good 
judges. There was still the plenary council of the whole church where 
the case could be discussed with those judges and if they were convic- 
ted of having judged wrongly, their sentences could be annulled.’ Let 
them indicate whether they did that. That they did not, we can easily 
prove from the fact that the whole world is in communion with him 
[Cecilianus]. If it was done, they were also defeated in the council.” 
It is the opinion of Augustine that even after a decision by the Roman 
pope, the universal council of the whole world is superior to him for 
the purpose of approving or absolving those who make the decision. 
Augustine holds this opinion in many places, [for instance] D. 19 
[c. 6] In canonicis; [(C.] 2 q. 7 [c. 35] Puto, para. Item: Cum Petrus and in 
other places cited in this work. 
150. There is no doubt on this point since Christ says to Peter: “If 
he will not hear the church, let him be to thee as an outcast and a 
publican.””!° Hence it is evident that he who does not obey the church 
and the council which represents it, is to be considered as an outcast 
and a publican by Peter and his successors. And this can be proved by 
'* Mansi 7, pp- 302ff., 7, p. 370, 6, pp. 1046ff., 11, pp. 554ff., 16, p. 189. 
Pl, 43. ps 100 16 Matthew 18:17. 
114 


[PDF page 167]
Book I, para. 151 
the authority of Pope St. Gregory in letter 214 in the [Papal] Register 
where, after he criticizes John, the Patriarch of Constantinople, for 
describing himself as the universal patriarch [he says] at the end: 
“And we against whom in rash presumption this offense is committed 
will put into practice what Truth commands when it says: ‘If thy 
brother has sinned against thee, etc.’ And so I a sinner who once 
through my emissaries and twice in humble words have striven to 
refute this in the whole church, write personally. Whatever I should 
have humbly done, I have done, but I am rejected for that correction. 
It remains for me to turn to the church.”!” Note that Pope Gregory 
admits that fraternal correction in this way is his duty as Christ 
commands and that as a last resort he should turn to the church as the 
supreme judge etc. 
151. ‘The same is also true of many other ordinances concerning the 
Roman see which were made in various ecumenical councils, and it is 
clear that those ordinances received their force from the fact that they 
were made by a higher authority. Hence the authority of the ecumeni- 
cal council is greater [than that of the pope]. This is proved by the 
canon of the Eighth Council concerning the power of patriarchs 
which also speaks of the Roman patriarch.'* Likewise it is proved by 
the tenth canon of the same council which begins Divina, which says: 
“This holy and universal synod rightly and properly defines and 
decides that no layman or monk or clergyman may separate himself 
from communion with his patriarch before a careful examination and 
decision by the synod, even if he claims to know that he is guilty of a 
criminal act.’’!’ It [the canon] does not discuss heresy, since, although 
one should not separate oneself [from communion with one’s 
patriarch], as that text and [C.] 2 q. 7 [c. 8] Sacerdotes and [C.] 8 q. 4 
[c. 1] Nonne state, these texts do not apply in the case of heresy 
because even if he has been tolerated, you should note that he was 
excommunicated at that time for falling into a condemned heresy, see 
[C.] 24 q. 1 [C. 1]. The Gloss also makes statements that agree with 
this when it discusses the aforesaid chapter Sacerdotes [c. 8] and the 
chapter Anastasius [c. 9] of D. 19 and one should always withdraw 
from a heretic, as is stated in the same place in the Gloss and as Pope 
Hadrian in synod also states in his third message which appears in the 
seventh action of the Eighth Council.’” And because that text refers to 
"Jaffe, p. 1357. 'S Mansi 16, pp. 170ff. 
9 Mansi 16, p. 166. 20 Mansi 16, p. 127. 


[PDF page 168]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
other crimes, the pope can also be judged by the council concerning 
other crimes besides heresy. 
152. This can also be proved from what was said by St. Peter to 
Clement, as appears in the letter of Clement to James where he says 
that Peter said to him when he established him as his successor: “For 
Christ did not wish to constitute you today as a judge with jurisdiction 
over secular affairs for fear that because of the burden of the human 
cares of the moment you could not dedicate yourself to the word of 
God. For if you were occupied with worldly concerns, you would 
deceive yourself and those who hear you. For you could not perceive 
what pertains to salvation more clearly than other men, and therefore 
you would be deposed as one who did not teach the way to the 
salvation of men, and your disciples would perish in ignorance.”””' 
Nevertheless I do not wish to assert that Clement actually did write in 
this way to James because it is sufficiently established as true that 
James died as a martyr eight years before Peter, as is discussed below 
in Part III.*? But since the church does not reject this letter, it is also 
clear that the pope can be deposed for negligence, for it says: “You 
would be deposed,” etc., and so this supports our proposition. 
153. Note therefore that the canon that discusses judgments by the 
council speaks of all patriarchs in the same way.”* From the acts of 
that council it appears that the pope is always called the Patriarch of 
Rome. If there is no doubt that a criminal case involving any other 
patriarch can be decided by the council, the same is true in the case of 
the Roman patriarch. [D.] 22 [c. 7] Diffinimus says that all patriarchs 
are equal as to [the possibility of] their deposition. Likewise the text of 
the tenth canon of the Eighth Council proves that all representatives 
are equal for the purpose of the deposition or correction of 
metropolitans. The acts of the Council of Chalcedon in its last action 
and in other places as well as other acts of the councils also prove that 
other patriarchs besides the Roman pope [acting] together with their 
councils have deposed bishops and archbishops.”* The laws which say 
that the pope alone can depose a bishop should therefore be under- 
stood to apply only in his own patriarchate. And the aforesaid acts of 
the Council of Chalcedon concerning the deposition of Anastasius 
seem to prove that a patriarch should carry out depositions not 
[merely] with the advice but with the consent of his council. For the 
*1 Hinschius, p. 32 (False Decretal). 2 Book 111, no. 309. 
3 See no. 151. 4 Mansi 7, pp. 314 and p. 291. 
116 


[PDF page 169]
Book I, para. 155 
bishops of the Council of Antioch say: ““We deposed Athanasius who 
was accused by the clergy of his church because he did not come 
when he had been called three times.””> Hence when the Archdeacon 
commenting on [D.] 22 [c. 5] Qua traditione, says that the pope can 
depose anyone without action by a council, this should be understood 
in accordance with what is contained below. It is true [that he can act] 
without a council of the universal church or even a patriarchal council 
when the one to be deprived of office or deposed falls under a penalty 
for an offense involving automatic imposition of punishment [latae 
sententiae]. 
154. But to cite a clearer definition by the same Eighth Universal 
Council to the effect that the pope is subject to the ecumenical 
council of the whole church, it says in canon 21 which begins Domini- 
cum sermonem para. Porro part of which is contained in [D.] 22 [c. 7] 
Diffinimus — that the universal synod is obliged to hear with due 
reverence any question that arises concerning the Roman see, and to 
go into those things, and to take action on them, but it could not pass 
judgment rashly on the Roman pontiff.*° Note that although the 
ecumenical council has to decide every question that arises concern- 
ing the Apostolic See, it should do this with due reverence and not 
pass judgment rashly, on account of the primacy [of Rome] and [the 
council’s] reverence for its head. 
155. Hence it is evident from these [examples] that the universal 
council is clearly [s/mpliciter]| superior to the pope. And it is not 
necessary to produce further examples of this since we have the 
various decrees of the Council of Basel as well as those of Constance, 
[declaring] that the pope is subject to the council. And although 
Constance only speaks of superiority in three cases, it is clear that all 
the canons which have been adopted and those that could be adopted 
further, can be reduced to these [three].*’ Was it not defined in the 
fifth session of this Council of Basel that no one, either in person or 
through his recognized representative, could leave the place where 
the council was meeting, even by the authority of Rome?** Why was 
this prohibition adopted if not because to allow it would work to the 
prejudice of the council? If therefore the authority of the Roman 
25 Mansi 7, p. 354. 26 Mansi 16, p. 174. 
27 Mansi 29, p. 21 and 27, p. 585. The three cases were “faith, the extirpation of schism, 
and reform of the church of God in head and members.” 
28 Mansi 29, p. 38. 
iy 


[PDF page 170]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
pontiff cannot extend to particular persons when it is presumed that 
this could operate to the prejudice of the council, who doubts that the 
council as a whole is over the pope? There are more such decrees of 
this council that prove this, such as those citing and warning the pope 
and decrees of this kind. 
CHAPTER XVIII 
THE ASSERTION THAT THE COUNCIL IS OVER THE 
POPE IS BASED ON AUGUSTINE’S STATEMENT THAT 
THE CHURCH WHICH WAS PROMISED TRUTH AND 
[DIVINE] ASSISTANCE IS REPRESENTED MORE 
CERTAINLY AND INFALLIBLY IN THE UNIVERSAL 
COUNCIL THAN IN THE POPE ALONE. THE CHAPTER 
DISCUSSES THE BASIC PRINCIPLES OF 
REPRESENTATION AND ADMINISTRATION, WHY 
PRELATES SHOULD BE ELECTED, AND WHAT 
PROCEDURE SHOULD BE FOLLOWED AND IT 
DESCRIBES HOW CARDINALS SHOULD BE ELECTED 
BY THE [CHURCH] PROVINCES AS THEIR 
REPRESENTATIVES. FURTHER SPECIFIC POINTS ARE 
MADE ABOUT THEM — THAT THEIR POWER HAS 
ARISEN FROM COMMON CONSENT, AND IN WHAT 
SENSE THIS IS TRUE. 
156. But so that we may see more profoundly that this is true, let us 
recall to mind what is said above concerning the representativity of 
the presiding officers of a council. And we may say that by the 
assistance of Christ the power of binding and loosing and infallibility 
and freedom from error are in the true Catholic church until the end 
of time. But since the Roman pontiff is a member of the church which 
is the Mystical Body of Christ, and infallibility was not promised to 
any member but to the whole church, there is no doubt that the 
unerring power of binding and loosing belonging to the whole church 
is superior to the power of the Roman pontiff, although the power of 
binding and loosing in both the church and the pope flows from the 
same source. And I say that this is true not only of the whole church 
118 


[PDF page 171]
Book II, para. 157 
but also of the priesthood in the church which is like one soul in the 
whole church. It is true by the promise and delegation of Christ, 
because the priesthood was established by the Holy Spirit to rule the 
church of Christ, as the Apostle Peter says: “Feed the flock which is 
among you”! etc. Therefore the priesthood, whether actually or 
potentially gathered together, exercises the power to feed the whole 
church which is delegated to it by Christ over the whole church and 
all its members including the pope. But because the universal council 
is a congregation or church gathering composed of the members of 
the whole Catholic church and for this reason represents the whole 
church, we should then consider that the Roman pontiff because he is 
the highest pontiff also acts as the figurative representative of the one 
universal church. 
157. Hence Augustine says in Sermon 7 on the Gospel of John con- 
cerning the passage, ““Thou shalt be called Cephas.” “It is a wonder- 
ful thing that he changed his name from Simon to Peter. For Peter is 
from petra [rock], and the rock is the Church. Thus the name of Peter 
is a figurative representation of the church.” He says the same thing 
in Sermon 11 and in his last sermon where, when he speaks of the 
church, Augustine says: ““The Apostle Peter was the representative of 
the church as a whole since he was first of the apostles. Considered as 
a person by nature he was a man, by grace he was a Christian, by more 
abundant grace he was an apostle — and at the same time the first of 
the apostles. When it was said to him: ‘I shall give thee the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven and whatsoever thou shalt bind etc.’ — he 
represented the whole church, and this is why he received the name 
of Peter. For it was not petra from Peter but Peter from petra, just as it 
is not Christ from Christian but Christian from Christ. Hence the 
Lord rightly says, ‘Upon this rock I will build my church,’ because 
Peter had said, ‘Thou art Christ, the son of the living God.’ Upon this 
rock therefore, which thou hast confessed, I will build my church. But 
the rock was Christ upon which foundation Peter himself also built. 
But the church that was founded by Christ, received the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven, that is the power of binding and loosing, from 
him through Peter. Peter’s relationship to the rock symbolizes the 
church’s relationship to Christ, since the rock symbolizes Christ and 
Peter the church.”* For this, see the text of Augustine in [C:] 11 q. 3 
'y Peter 5:2. *PL 35, p. 1444. The scriptural quotation is from John 1:42. 
3PL 35, p. 1763 (Tractatus 50). 
119 


[PDF page 172]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
[c. 87] I/ud; and that of Leo in [D.] 19 [c. 7] /ta Dominus; and the 
Archdeacon discussing [C.] 24 q. 1 [c. 6] Quodcumque and the chapter 
Quicumque [c. 27], D. 21 [before c. 1] Decretis, and De poenitentia, D. 2 
[c. 40] Si es [enim] v. Petrus. See also Augustine, The Christian Combat, 
c. 20 and his Homily on the Transfiguration and On the Words of the 
Lord, Book 1, Sermon 13, and On the Apostles Peter and Paul, Sermon 
13, and Book m1 q. 79 of Questions on the Old and New Testament, and 
Homily 46 in the Book of Homilies and Sermon 73 on Psalm 108, and 
Ambrose, On Pastoral Care and Anselm on the passage of Matthew, 
“For the poor you have always with you.’”* 
And because Peter is from petra [rock] and the rock is the church 
which signifies Christ, and for this reason is his Mystical Body, it is 
evident that as Christ is truth, the rock — which is the image [figura], 
or sign of Christ — is the church, and the image or sign of this rock is 
Peter. Hence just as Christ is the truth which the rock or the church 
represents or signifies, so the rock is the truth which Peter signifies or 
represents. From this it is clear that the church is over Peter just as 
Christ is over the church. Just as we say that the Old Testament 
prefigures the New and that the New Testament is the truth in 
relation to the Old Testament and is therefore superior to it and the 
representation [/iguram]| of the future glory where alone there is the 
truth so that the New Testament is both truth and representation, 
truth with respect to that which is below it, and representation with 
respect to that above, the same thing is also true of the Catholic 
church. 
158. Hence it is clear that as Peter represents the church as an 
individual in an obscure way and subject to error, there are many 
grades of representation and signification between the rock and Peter 
so that we move from the weakest representation and sign through 
intermediate representations that are more certain and true, to the 
rock which is truth. But only one person or one gathering which the 
Greeks call a synod can signify and represent the one church. There- 
fore in the case of a universal synod we should ask whether it is a 
properly-ordered gathering that can represent the universal church 
united as a synod because it includes, for example, the pope, the 
patriarchs, and the heads of the provinces etc. According to what has 
*PL 40, p. 308; PL 158, p. 604 (Anselm of Canterbury); PL 38, pp. 479 and 1348ff.; PL 
35, Pp. 2273 (False Decretal); PL 38, p. 1148; PL 37, p. 1537; PL 139, p. 171 (False 
Decretal). Anselm’s Commentary has not been printed. 
120 


[PDF page 173]
Book Il, para. 159 
been said above, when it happens that a universal synod is properly 
congregated in this way, there is no doubt that the more certainly and 
truly that synod represents the church, the more its judgment tends 
towards infallibility rather than fallibility, and that this judgment is 
always better than the individual judgment of the Roman pontiff who 
represents the church in a very uncertain way [confusissime]. There is 
an old proverb that what many look for is found more easily. Hence 
the individual judgment of a pope should be presumed to be less 
stable and more fallible than that of the pope along with others — and 
there is no doubt about this. 
159. What has been said above seems to be proved by Letter 62 of 
St. Ambrose — which was written by a Roman pontiff and not by St. 
Ambrose as is proven by comparing that letter with the one immedi- 
ately preceding it. For Letter 61 of St. Ambrose to Theophilus 
begins, “‘Evagrius does not have a basis for what he urges, and Flavian 
has reason to fear a trial and therefore avoids it. Let the brethren 
pardon our justified grief. Because of these men the whole world is 
disturbed, yet they do not share our sorrow.” And below, “Serious 
discord has arisen in the whole world. In the shipwreck of precious 
peace, the holy Synod of Capua finally offered a haven of tranquillity 
when it declared that communion should be established with all those 
throughout the East who profess the Catholic faith, and that these two 
men should be tried by Your Holiness with the participation of our 
brethren and fellow bishops of Egypt — for we felt that your judgment 
would be a true one. We think that you should certainly consult our 
holy brother, the bishop of the church of Rome, for we presume that 
you will make decisions which in no way displease him. A decision on 
the sentence will be useful and assure peace and quiet — if it is 
decreed by your council.” And he proceeds further, “What the 
Roman church has undoubtedly approved, we gladly approve as the 
result of this trial.’’”> Following this there is a letter with the answer of 
the pope himself to what had been written by the judges appointed by 
the council, as Ambrose had advised. And at the beginning the pope, 
whose name I have not found in my manuscript, says that they asked 
his decision concerning Bishop Bonosus in all truth and modesty. 
And below: “We note that the procedure for making such a decision 
is not available to us. If the full synod were meeting today, we would 
PL 16, p. 1220. 
12] 


[PDF page 174]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
be right in deciding on the matters to which your writings refer. But it 
is now your duty to decide everything since you have been given the 
responsibility for judging the case.” And below: “You are the 
representatives of the synod whom it chose for the investigation. 
Finally since after your decision bishop Bonosus asked our brother 
Ambrose to give his advice as to whether he should enter the pro- 
hibited church by force, he answered him that nothing should be 
done rashly, but everything with modesty, patience, and in order. And 
nothing was to be attempted in violation of your decisions, so that you 
to whom the synod had given the authority might decide what seemed 
just to you. Therefore the first thing is for those to whom the power to 
decide has been given to make a decision. For, as we have written, you 
are the representatives of the whole synod, and it is not proper for us 
to judge as if we had the authority of the synod.” And finally at the 
end: “Hence we await your decision.’ 
160. Here the pope declares that if the synod were acting as a 
whole, that is, if it had not delegated the power of judgment to others, 
he could have decided on the case himself. But because the synod 
delegated it to others he says that he cannot decide the case and it is 
not fitting for him to act with the authority of the synod. Note this, for 
it clearly proves that the authority of the synod is over the pope and 
also that those assigned to act as representatives of the whole synod 
have greater power than the pope in a matter assigned to them. The 
Pope who wrote this was St. Damasus, I believe, because the immedi- 
ately following letter, No. 63, says that Damasus was pope at the time 
since Ambrose says: “Also two years ago, St. Damasus, bishop of the 
Roman church, elected by the judgment of God, sent me, etc.’”” 
161. Hence we conclude that a universal council if properly assem- 
bled although its decisions may vary in degree [of authoritativeness] is 
alwaysvof greater authority and less fallible than is the pope alone. 
From this it follows as a corollary that the universal council also has 
the power to depose [the pope] in cases other than heresy as, we read, 
was true in the cases of Benedict XII and John XXIII.° And this is 
proved from ch. 1 [of 17] De Renuntiatione, in the Liber Sextus. For if 
as stated there, the papacy can be taken away from the material 
subject, i.e. the person involved, by the decision of the pope himself 
°PL 16, pp. 1222-1224 and PL 13, p. 1176 (Pope Siricius). 
7Pope Damasus died in 384 and was succeeded by Siricius, who wrote the letter. 
* Mansi 27, pp. 1141ff. and 652ff. (the Council of Constance). 
122 


[PDF page 175]
Book II, para. 162 
when he decides that he is incapable of ruling, and if, as we have 
argued, the decision of a council is of greater authority and less 
fallible than that of the pope alone, then it is clear that just as the pope 
can for legitimate reasons resign from office, so his subjects in com- 
mon council can cease to give obedience for the same reasons when 
he is guilty of misrule. For when a prelate is elected, he is chosen to 
rule well, see [C.] 1 q. 1 [after c. 43], Ecce cum honore; [C.] 8 q. 1 [c. 
11] Qui episcopatum; |C.] 28 q. 1 [c. 8] Jam nunc; and Decretals 1 9 De 
renuntiatione [c. 10] Nis cum pridem para. Porro; and [C.] 23 q. 4 [c. 5] 
Quisquis. So when he rules badly the tacit condition on the consent 
given is put into effect and since the reason for which he was elected 
ceases to exist, those who elected him then give that authority to the 
council itself, a fortiori, — although the pope says that he possesses it in 
that first chapter [of Liber Sextus 1 7 De renuntiatione|. No rational 
person can doubt that a council which represents the church has 
power over the papacy to direct its occupant in accordance with the 
needs of the church which is greater than the decision of one man 
concerning a papal office which has been given to him in the name of 
the church and for its benefit. 
162. There may perhaps be some doubt that the council can deprive 
a single legitimate pope of the exercise of administration temporarily 
or at will, not because the council does not have power but because it 
is a contradiction in terms, since it is clear from the above and also 
from later passages that an essential element in the papal office is the 
free exercise of administration so that if that is taken away, the papacy 
is taken away. However since the Council of Constance and this — 
Council of Basel issued certain decrees against the pope under pain 
of suspension,’ I cannot deny that the pope can be suspended, 
although at first glance, I would want to assert that despite that 
suspension a person who has received absolution in the area of con- 
science, where the pope has special power from God, as long as he is 
pope would be truly absolved. This suspension ought not to extend to 
that power because it appears to be attached to the papacy by divine 
intention, although besides that power he would not have the exercise 
of any others which depend on law or men or involve externals. But if 
the council wanted expressly to take away from him by suspension the 
exercise of the power of binding and loosing in the penitential sphere, 
’ Mansi 27, pp. 625ff. and 29, p. 59. The Basel decree was adopted on July 13, 1433, 
which is helpful in dating this part of the Concordantia. 
123 


[PDF page 176]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
then one should either say that he was deposed at that time or that the 
papacy is something other than the free administration of the power of 
binding and loosing — but this would contradict what is said above and 
would be a novelty. 
163. From this and from what has been touched on above it is clear 
that any ruler represents his subjects in proportion to the generality of 
the representation, so that the pope represents the whole church in a 
vague way, and he represents his patriarchate in a more direct way, his 
metropolitanate still more directly, his diocese still more certainly, his 
clergy yet more certainly, and finally he represents his daily council, as 
it were, in a single body. So it is that the cardinals as representatives 
of the provinces who assist the Roman pontiff are called the principal 
members and part of the body of the pope. From this it is also clear 
that the more specific the rulership, the more certain and less vague 
the representation by the ruler. Therefore since, as Jerome says to 
Rusticus in [C.] 7 q. 1 [c. 41] /n Apibus, every ecclesiastical order has 
rulers who finally bring them together as one, by natural and divine 
law those rulers ought to be established by consent, and as Pope 
Anicetus has said, it is proper that the one who is to be over all should 
be chosen by all, see D. 66 [c. 1] Archiepiscopus, and no one should be 
set up over unwilling subjects, as will be said below because, accord- 
ing to St. Leo, there is no reason which permits someone who is not 
elected to be a bishop.'” 
164. On this point for one body to be established in a harmony of 
subjects and ruler, reason and natural and divine law all require that 
there be mutual consent in this spiritual marriage which is demon- 
strated by the election by all and the consent of the one elected, just as 
a spiritual marriage is rightly established by consent between Christ 
and his church, as is said in [C.] 7 q. 1 [c. 11] Sicut and in other 
chapters in the same place, and in many similar passages of D. 62 and 
63, and in [C.] 24 q. 1 [c. 33] Pudenda and D. 63 [c. 19] Metropolitano. 
Thus although the sacraments can be given to someone against his 
will, this is not the case with matrimony since consent is of the 
essence there, see [C.] 27 q. 2 [before c. 1] para. 1 and [C.] 32 [31] q. 
2 [before ch. 1] para. 1, and as the Gloss notes on [C.] 1 q. 1 [c. 3] 
Constat. But the church is the wife or spouse of the bishop, see [C.] 21 
q. 3 Sicut and similar passages, and therefore etc. On this more will be 
'OPL 54, p. 120. The reference to unwilling subjects is from the Decretum, D. 61 c. nigh 
124 


[PDF page 177]
Book I, para. 165 
said below.'' Hence if right order is to be preserved, the text of the 
Council of Toledo in D. 51 [c. 5] Qui in aliquo and those in D. 62 [c. 
1] Nulla and D. 23 [c. 1] Jn nomine Domini and similar texts should be 
observed so that parish priests and curates are elected or at least some 
convenient provision is made for consent to their appointment, as is 
stated in D. 67 [c. 1] Reliqui, D. 63 [c. 20] Si in plebibus. Then the 
clergy should elect the bishop with the consent of the laity, see D. 63 
[c. 11] Plebs and [c. 12] Nosse, and the bishops the metropolitan with 
the consent of the clergy, see D. 66 [before ch. 1] Archiepiscopi. The 
metropolitans of the provinces with the consent of the bishops should 
elect the representatives of the provinces who assist the pope and are 
called cardinals and those cardinals should elect the pope, if possible 
with the consent of the metropolitans. But if it does not seem useful to 
wait for their consent because of the danger that the papacy will be 
vacant for too long, then the present procedure should be followed 
[but] in better order. This would mean that the Roman pontiff would 
have with him a continuing council which legitimately represents the 
whole church. With this council, there is no doubt the church would 
be ruled in the best possible fashion. 
165. Hence when canon 26 of the Eighth Universal Council com- 
manded under the pain of automatic excommunication that the deci- 
sion of the patriarch should be strictly observed, it said that it was just, 
reasonable, and above suspicion because a number of honorable men 
were associated with him.'* And the canon did not speak of the 
Roman cardinals because, as is clear from the canon Praesul [c. 2] as 
well as the canon [c. 3] Nullam of [C.] 2 q. 5 [q. 4], bishops at that 
time always took precedence over cardinals because they were more 
important than the cardinals — as appears in the Gloss on [C.] 2 q. 7 
[c. 34] Quamquam because the cardinals were priests and deacons of 
the Roman clergy, as appears in the same place and in D. 79 [D. 78] 
[c. g] Si quis pecunia and the chapter [c. 3] Oportebat and the chapter 
[c. 5] Si quis ex episcopis. For as the text of D. 24 [c. 3] Presbyteri 
proves, the title of cardinal stands for a certain eminence, where 
“cardinal pontiff” is the title given to the metropolitan etc. And this is 
also proved by D. 93 [c. 5] 4 subdiacono and by the statement of Leo 
IX above. Also the Archdeacon commenting on D. 22 [c. 2] 
Sacrosancta says that the pope is counted among the cardinals and that 
"| Book u, ch. 32, no. 232. 
12 Mansi 16, p. 178. 
125 


[PDF page 178]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
bishops are also to be called cardinals as is stated in [C.] 21 q. 1 [c. 5] 
Relatio; [C.] 7 q. 1 [c. 42] Pastoralis; and D. 71 [c. 5] Fraternitatem. 
166. But the text mentioned above speaks of the metropolitans and 
representatives of the provinces who were obliged to come to the 
patriarchal council in accordance with canon 17.'’ Therefore since it 
is difficult to assemble a plenary universal council, I would think that 
the first essential reform for good government would be that the 
cardinals be chosen from the representatives of the provinces and that 
anything important or against the general content of the canons be 
decided in a council of cardinals and signed both by the pope and the 
cardinals. The signing is to show that this is done with clear know- 
ledge and careful examination so that in this way the canons can be 
observed with due reverence, and provision can be made for particu- 
lar cases of utility and necessity. For the cardinals act in place of the 
metropolitans, see D. 23 [c. 1] /n nomine Domini, and Hostiensis 
notes this in his Summa [commenting on Decretals v 38] De Poenitentia 
et Remissionibus para. Cui papa v. Alii dicunt. Therefore just as the 
metropolitans of the provinces are established through election by the 
members of the provinces, so the cardinals who represent them 
should also be constituted in the same way, as described above. And 
this seems to be especially necessary at this time because the 
metropolitans and bishops do not make an annual visit to the pope as 
they did of old, although perhaps they still swear to do so according to 
the ancient form, as is mentioned in the canon Episcopi [after c. 3] and 
subsequent passages of D. g2. The Roman pontiffs were also 
accustomed to make use of their advice in deciding difficult cases. Of 
old this was strictly observed, especially by the metropolitans, as we 
read in canon 17 of the Eighth Universal Council, since they could 
not be excused either on account of conflicting provincial synods or 
being summoned by a secular prince. Today however even if they are 
present at the Roman curia, as foreigners they are not summoned to 
the papal council. This is absurd, especially when a case involving the 
universal church or a matter in some way affecting the whole church 
is under consideration. Hence it seems necessary to create such 
representatives of the provinces as cardinals for many worthwhile 
reasons as any intelligent person who has any knowledge of the pro- 
cedure of the Roman cura will easily recognize. 
'3 Mansi 16, p. 171. 
126 


[PDF page 179]
Book IT, para. 167 
GEA PAPE ReX 
FREESELEC TION IS DHE BASIS OF ALE: PROPERLY 
ORDERED POWER — A BRIEF BUT WELL=EXPRESSED 
DISCUSSION. 
167. If the laws and decrees of the holy fathers were observed which 
say that no one should be appointed to ruling responsibility who is not 
elected by those over whom he is to rule — so that he may recognize 
that his rulership comes from those over whom he is ruling and thus 
act as a loving pastor without pride — we would see how properly 
ordered elections on each level would produce the result described 
above by St. Augustine — Peter would be based on (lit. — originate 
from) the rock [petra] that is the church of the faithful. Not that the 
power to rule which is in rulers comes in its entirety from the people, 
but, as is said above, just as the moving and sensible parts of the soul 
are produced out of the potency of matter but its rational part comes 
from God, so the priesthood which is the soul of the church militant 
derives its moving, vegetative, and sensible power to rule from the 
faithful subjects — a power which comes from the potency of matter of 
the faithful by way of voluntary subjection — but the power of the 
rational soul which comes from above, it receives from God through 
the sacraments. In this way power from on high can flow in sweet 
harmony to the body of the subjects through the mediation of a power 
which comes from it and is granted by it in order to bring about a 
salutary union [of the faithful] with Christ, the head. Hence Pope 
Hormisda says to the bishops of Spain: “Let not the blessing which 
we believe comes from God through the laying-on of hands be sold 
for money. Who would think that something is valuable if he has sold 
it? Let the election observe proper reverence for the priests to be 
ordained, keeping in mind that the weighty decision of the people is 
the judgment of God. For God is present where there is genuine 
consent without irregularity.”’ And although God has reserved the 
deposition of the most high priests for himself, he has given their 
election to the faithful, see D. 79 in the final chapter [c. 11] and divine 
grace appoints the one who is chosen by common consent, see [C.] 8 
PIs Ose pededs 
127 


[PDF page 180]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
q. 2 [c. 2] Dilectissimi. On this there is more at greater length below. 
168. And it is a happy thought that all power, whether spiritual or 
temporal and corporeal, is potentially in the people, although in order 
for the power to rule to be activated there must necessarily be the 
concurrence of that formative radiance from above to establish it in 
being since it is true that all power is from above — I speak of properly 
ordered power — just as from the potential of the earth, the lowest of 
the elements, various vegetable and sensible beings are produced 
through the mediating influence of heaven. Hence it was not inap- 
propriate for the Abbot Joachim when he discussed the Apocalypse to 
say that the people represent the Father, the secular clergy the Son, 
and the religious the Holy Spirit, because as the Son comes from the 
Father, so the clergy comes from the laity, and as the Holy Spirit 
comes from both so the religious proceed from the laity and the 
clergy.” 
“Joachim of Flora, Jn Apocalypsim (Venice, 1527). On the influence of Joachim, see Eric 
Voegelin, The New Science of Politics, Chicago, 1952, reprinted 1987. 
CHAPTER XX 
EGE EO Pie CEAININ OG AT BIR: Ol Gr Awe CAL UAUN EG Em) 
ISEB E eUL. WIND INET oeeulb, (CaeVINFOUNESS . AN SWESS 1S) TAIRONAYIS, IB) 133N% 
AO WEE ORD DAN VED Eee Shy CANNES BES en vAUN DD) 
DOCTRINAL STATEMENTS, AS WELL AS MANY 
ARGUMENTS. DISPENSATIONS AND A DECLARATION 
THAT A CANON DOES NOT APPLY IN A PARTICULAR 
CASE CAN TAKE PLAGE WITHOUT ADVERSELY 
AFFPEGTING THE GANNON, THIS Is DISCUSSEDUAT 
PENG TH VAS APP ROP REA ie 
169. From what has been written above it is easy to answer another 
current problem — whether the pope can be bound by the decrees of 
the universal council so that he cannot act against them. For if the 
universal council, properly speaking, is above the pope, as is said 
above, the problem is resolved. Hence although the pope in the 
chapter [c. 4] Significasti of [Decretals 1 6] De Electione says he is over 
the council and in the chapter [c. 4] Proposuit of [Decretals 111 8] De 
128 


[PDF page 181]
Book II, para. 170 
Concessione Praebendae says that he is above the laws, this is true [only] 
of his own general council over which he presides as patriarch, and of 
the laws adopted there or in other particular councils or laws made by 
him — although I grant that because of its rulership over all men in the 
church the Apostolic See has the power of equity [epieikeia],' and this 
cannot be taken away in particular cases since he often has to dispense 
from, and interpret [the law] in cases of utility and necessity for the 
welfare of the church — but only for that purpose. That he cannot 
abrogate or change the canons of the universal councils or adopt 
anything to the contrary is proved by the noted text, [C.] 25 q. 1 [c. 7] 
Contra statuta where Pope Zosimus says: “The authority of this see 
can neither adopt nor amend any law contrary to the statutes of the 
fathers.” And Zosimus also says the same thing to Aurelius and all the 
bishops established in Africa, Gaul etc., “When action is taken con- 
trary to the statutes of the holy fathers, injury is done not only to the 
wise decision that they decreed should govern forever, but also in a 
certain way to the discipline of the Catholic faith itself. For what can 
be more holy and venerable than never to depart from the way of our 
ancestors whose canonical statutes act as a kind of foundation for the 
burdens of our faith which we must bear?””’ 
170. These points are also proved from the fact that Pope Damasus 
when he wrote to Paulinus commanded that those who came back to 
the faith be required to subscribe not only to the declaration of faith 
of the Nicene Council, but also to its canons, as appears in D. 100 ¢. 
1, 2, and 3.° The text [of Pope Zosimus] quoted above says: “Against 
the statutes of the fathers, that is, the canons,” as the text of D. 20 |[c. 
1] De libellis says. The end of this latter text agrees completely with 
that of Zosimus above since it says: “It is clear that no one genuinely 
believes and holds the holy gospels to his benefit if he does not 
observe the statutes of the holy ones that we call canons.”” And Pope 
St. Gregory in the [Papal] Register says to John, bishop of Larissa, at 
the end of the letter which begins, Frater noster Adrianus: “We decree 
and define that in accordance with the holy fathers anyone who does 
not obey the sacred canons may not minister at the sacred altars or 
receive communion.’”* And the canons which are thus to be revered 
by all should be adopted in universal councils, D. 16 [c. 6] Habeo 
librum, and they are called general canons, as Gregory says of the 
'On epieikeia, see Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, v, 10. 
2PL2oyp. 661. “PL56,pro86: “*PL. 77; port. 
129 


[PDF page 182]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
canons of the Council of Chalcedon in the Register in his letter to 
Secundinus which begins: Dilectionis tuae, where he says: “The holy 
synod of Chalcedon spoke in order to define the faith and promulgate 
canons on general matters. After the canons were adopted, it con- 
cerned itself with the settlement of particular disputes among the 
bishops.” The Archdeacon notes that the pope cannot repeal statutes 
that affect the universal state of the church. See his comments on D. 
19 [after c. 7] [ta Dominus at the end, and the chapter [c. 6] Sunt 
quidam and other chapters in [C.] 25 q. 1 cited there make the same 
point. 
171. Again the pope is the shepherd of mankind. To him it has 
rightly been said: ““Feed my sheep.’ But the rules and canons of the 
ecumenical councils have been issued for our moral betterment, see 
D. 31 [c. 12] Nicaena igitur, and the pope is obliged to obey them and 
should employ them in feeding his flock, for the saving canons were 
adopted by divine inspiration, as Pope Leo IV says in [C.] 25 q. 1 [c. 
16] /deo. Therefore the Universal Council of Constance also added 
that if he did not obey them he could be punished because no see 
should follow the legislation of all the synods more than should the 
Roman see, as Pope Gelasius says in [C.] 25 q. 1 [c. 1] Confidimus.’ 
And Pope Leo who is described in the Eighth Council as the trumpet 
of truth says to Emperor Marcian that the Nicene canons cannot be 
uprooted by wickedness, nor abridged by innovation, and adds: “And 
in the faithful performance of my duties, with Christ as a guide, I 
must carry out my service with perseverance since [the power: of] 
dispensation has been entrusted to me and I would be judged guilty if 
the norms contained in the sanctions of the fathers which were 
established by the inspiration of the spirit of God were violated — God 
forbid! — by my acquiescence.’’* A text of Pope Leo says this in [C.] 
25 q. 1 [c. 3] Quae ad perpetuam. In addition when Leo refers to his 
approval of the [decrees on] faith of the General Council of 
Chalcedon, in a letter which begins Omnem, sent to all the bishops, he 
says that anything done against the Nicene canons of which, he says, 
he is the guardian, is worthless and invalid. But the reason that he 
cannot act against them and he above all is obliged to follow them is 
that, as the text Violatores [c. 5] says in the same place, they were 
established by the spirit of God for the good governance of the 
> PL 77, p. 986. : John 21:17. 
7 Mansi 27, p. 590. 8 Mansi 11, p. 66; PL 54, p. 995. 
130 


[PDF page 183]
Book II, para. 172 
universal church, and it is the responsibility of the Roman pontiff to 
advance them in the spiritual plane.’ Hence the Archdeacon notes in 
his comment on D. 19 [c. 7] /ta dominus, that the pope cannot repeal 
the statutes that concern the universal state of the church. 
172. And so the canon of the universal council is the guide and rule 
for the governance and progress of the church which the first builder 
should use if he wishes to exercise his power properly. For no one 
could create more just or unerring rules than the Holy Spirit who 
inspires the universal councils. Hence in the sixth action of the Eighth 
Council, Zacharis, the bishop of Chalcedon, when the opinion of the 
Roman pontiff was put before him, said: “The canon is the rule for 
Pope Nicholas and the other patriarchs, and if they act in accordance 
with it, they will do nothing which is not proper. But when they do 
something against it, whether it is Pope Nicholas or anyone else, we 
will not acquiesce.” And below: “If these things were done by 
Nicholas in accordance with the canon, we follow, agree, and confirm 
them, and we do not recognize anything which is contrary to them. 
But if they were done contrary to law and the canon, it is not we who 
censure or reject them, but the canon.” Then when Metrophanes 
answered, he did not claim that the pope was above the law but said: 
“In a different case a different evaluation and opinion should also 
result,” and he answered that he had decided according to the regula- 
tions and no alleged custom to the contrary concerning the promotion 
of laymen or even of catechumens to the high position of patriarch or 
archbishop could prevail against them. He said: “This is obvious, for 
what is done as a rare exception does not subvert the established 
laws.”’!” For there was very great concern among the ancients to 
preserve the canons and frequently there is a statute placed at the 
beginning of the canons of a given synod concerning their observance, 
as in [C.] 25 q. 1 [c. 14] A sanctis, and in the canons of Carthage 
where we read: “We must observe what has been done or said above 
or written by other councils. If anyone violates them, if he is a layman 
let him be denied communion, if a clergyman deprived of his posi- 
tion.” Everyone said: “We approve; we approve.”"' And this is stated 
still more strongly in the zoth chapter of the general council which 
was held previous to the Sixth Universal Council in the reign of Pope 
Martin — who according to the Gloss on D. 18 [c. 15] Propter had 
AMAL, Beye, wey '0 Mansi 16, pp. 87-90. "| Hinschius, p. 94. 
131 


[PDF page 184]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
reissued the canons. Its words are reproduced as follows in the eighth 
action of the Eighth Universal Council: “If anyone, following criminal 
heretics in violation of the law, changes in any way by word, time, or 
place, the terms which the fathers and saints of the holy Catholic 
church and the five universal synods have so clearly established, 
rashly inventing novel doctrines or altering the expositions of the faith 
or propounding other creeds or laws or definitions, or formulations 
...” and below, “... or dispositions which are inconsistent with, or 
unknown to, ecclesiastical procedure ...” and below, “against the 
holy paternal conciliar teachings of the orthodox [believers] in the 
Catholic church . . . let the one who impiously does this if he has not 
repented, be condemned forever and let all the people say: So be it, so 
be it.”'? And Pope Martin signed together with the others. From this 
you see that the canon was speaking of the universal councils, since 
the Roman pontiffs are obliged by them. Hence we read that the 
popes signed the canons in the ecumenical councils — as they also did 
in their own general councils as noted above. 
173. But that canon does not speak of all the canons and laws and 
definitions of the fathers but of those of the five ecumenical councils 
which were the only ones held previous to that time. Thus [Pope] Leo 
writes to Maximus, the patriarch of Antioch, that the canons of the 
Nicene Council are inviolable.'’ That the Roman pontiffs who like 
the other patriarchs are obliged to hold the profession [of faith] of the 
universal councils, are also obliged to observe the canons by reason of 
that profession is proved by the text Sancta [c. 8] of D. 16. In the 
profession of faith located there the pope declares that he will observe 
the eight councils to the letter, and follow in every way what they 
command and teach. And the text of D. 15 [c. 2] Sicut also proves 
this, and the text of D. 50 [c. 16] Sicut sanctitas, demonstrates that in 
that canon Sicut St. Gregory referred not only to the faith but also to 
the canons [of the councils]. The same thing is also proved by the 
declaration of [Pope] Leo IX to Peter of Antioch in which, after seven 
universal councils had been held, he says, ““Whatever the aforesaid 
seven universal councils have felt and approved, I feel and approve.”"* 
And in the Panormia of St. Ivo, bishop of Chartres, the declaration of 
faith of the Roman pontiff from the Book of the Roman Pontiffs 
appears in this form: “I declare that I will diligently and carefully 
'2 Mansi ro, pp. 1159 and 1162. 
'3 Mansi 54, p. 1043. PD Pierdae paras. 
132 


[PDF page 185]
Book I, para. 175 
confirm and maintain undiminished and enforce as adopted, all the 
canonical decrees of all our preceding apostolic pontiffs which they 
have adopted in synod and confirmed. Likewise I will condemn and 
abjure whatever and whomever they have rejected and condemned.” 
And after this [in the Panormia] there follows another declaration [of 
faith] from the book of the Popes which is called the Liber Diurnus: “I 
declare that I will not make any diminution or alteration or innovation 
in any of the traditions that I have found handed down and preserved 
by my most worthy predecessors, but as their true and fervent disciple 
following in their footsteps with my whole heart, I will observe and 
revere what has been handed down to me in a canonical manner.”’” 
174. From this it is clear that of old the holy Roman pontiffs were 
not so presumptuous about their power but were humble, even [to the 
point of] confessing their sins before their own synods — not that of 
the universal church [since] the synod of the universal church is the 
universal council. On these confessions, see [C.] 2 q. 4 [q. 5] [c. ro] 
Mandastis, where the Gloss compares the pope to the dean who can 
confess his sins before his [cathedral] chapter as Sixtus did before his 
synod.!° See also the canons, Auditum [c. 18] and Omnibus nobis {c. 
19]. Indeed Pope Leo [I] said that he would submit to all the penalties 
contained in the laws of [Emperor] Marcian, if he did not observe 
them after he had approved them — as he himself writes to Emperor 
Leo concerning his consent to the laws: “If I have violated them,” he 
says, “I submit to the conditions of punishment which were 
established by the authority of Emperor Marcian of happy memory 
and I have confirmed by my own consent.”'’ From this we conclude 
that when the pope submits himself, there is no doubt that he is 
bound by his decisions, as the Gloss notes on the chapter [c. 6] S7 
Papa of D. 40. But we are arguing here that the pope has submitted to 
the laws to which he has given his consent in writing, and since it has 
been clearly proven above from his own declaration that the pope has 
approved the canons in the records of the universal councils, he is 
therefore also subject to them. 
175. In addition, anyone who has violated what he has professed 
'S PL 161, pp. 1130ff. St. Ivo of Chartres (c. 1040-1116) wrote works on canon law before 
Gratian’s Decretum, the most important of which was the Panormia. 
'©Cusanus is referring to the unprinted Old Gloss (Glossa Antiqua) which is manuscript 
no. 223 in the hospital at Kues. 
“PL 54, pp. 1144ff. 


[PDF page 186]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
and signed, is to be deposed in council as the title of the sixth chapter 
of the Council of Africa says. And the text says: “At the request of 
Bishop Gennadius all the bishops said: ‘Whoever violates what he has 
professed and signed will separate himself from this meeting.’ ”"® 
Note that, as Pope Leo says above, if the pope either promises to 
observe or signs the statutes and does not keep them, he condemns 
himself. See also the promise of Leo IV concerning the observance of 
the laws [made] to Emperor Lothar whom he also addresses as “‘pon- 
tiff’ in the manner of the ancients in D. 10 [c. 9] De capitulis. And on 
this basis and in view of the way in which the popes signed the decrees 
of their patriarchal councils as reviewed above, it would not be absurd 
to say that the pope also cannot take away or change the statutes 
issued in synod by the Roman church, because I have found that he 
subscribed to these in the same way as he did to the statutes of the 
universal council of the whole church. On this point however, 
although he should not change the patriarchal statutes because he has 
signed them — if he did, it should not be said that the revocation or 
change had as little value as if he had changed a statute of an 
ecumenical council of the Catholic church because the pope is 
obliged to observe this latter kind of statute not only from his having 
subscribed to it, but because it was issued by an authority which is 
superior to him. Therefore it should be said all the more emphatically 
that he is under the universal canons to which the Roman pontiffs 
through their legates have subscribed. This is well put in the text, [C.] 
2 q. 7 [c. 41] Nos si, which proves this sufficiently, along with the 
following paragraphs [tem Hieronymus and Item Symmachus which 
seems to say — contrary to Hinc etiam [after c. 6] in D. 17 — that 
Symmachus was deposed in the Roman synod. In fact this was the 
case but he was reinstated because according to Hinc etiam of D. 17, it 
did not have the right to do so. And these things can be seen in the 
original acts of that council transcribed in solemn and eloquent form 
by Deacon Ennodius.'? The next chapter [c. 42] also speaks on the 
above points. And we also conclude that the Roman pontiff is subject 
to a council of the universal church from the fact that we read that the 
legates of the Apostolic See who attended the universal councils stood 
up when they spoke to the council, following the example of Peter 
who stood up in the council of Jerusalem when he spoke as a sign of 
'§ Second Council of Carthage (Hinschius, p. 294). 
MPL 63, pp. 183ff. 
134 


[PDF page 187]
Book IH, para. 176 
his subordination and reverence. Thus we read in the Sixth Ecumeni- 
cal Council held in Constantinople, in its first action: “And rising 
to their feet, those who were representing the Apostolic See of 
Rome ...”*’ And we read the same things in other councils. 
176. We also find that the universal council examined the letters 
and writings of the Roman pontiffs sent to the council. In the third 
action of the Eighth Council when the letter of Pope Hadrian had 
been read by the council, the representatives of old Rome asked 
whether the letter had been composed in a canonical and synodic 
fashion. The holy synod said: “The letter of the most holy Pope 
Hadrian which has been read is canonical and in good order and 
correct throughout.” And Metrophanes, the worthy bishop of 
Smyrna, stood up and said: “We have taken cognizance of the wise 
message of the most holy pope of Rome and of the concern which he 
has for the observance of the holy canons.” And Pope Nicholas says 
to the Emperor Michael that “this holy apostolic church is the head of 
all churches which in all its actions always follows the unfailing auth- 
ority of the holy fathers.’’*! This appears in the fourth action of the 
same Eighth Council and subsequently in the letter of Pope Nicholas 
to Photius which begins, Postqguam, which appears in the same place. 
In this letter after Pope Nicholas proves the primacy of the Apostolic 
See, and demonstrates that because of that primacy the Roman pontiff 
is responsible for all who are called by the name of Christ for whom 
he has to give an accounting in an eternal judgment, he adds that all 
the faithful seek the teaching of the Roman church and ask it for 
sound doctrine and the pardon of offenses which by the grace of God 
should be given to them, for it [Rome] is the head of the churches 
from which all churches demand right order in all ecclesiastical activi- 
ties, because the Roman church keeps the canonical and synodal 
decrees of the holy fathers inviolate and unbroken, and for this reason 
its judgment is certain.” Note that the reason given for the certainty 
of the decision of the Apostolic See of Rome is its unbroken 
observance of the inviolable canons. In the same way in chapter six of 
his own council made up of the whole Roman church, he says: 
“Because we should keep securely in mind the doctrines of our 
ancestors and always venerate the dogmas of the holy fathers in all 
things ...,” and this is also contained in the seventh action [of the 
20Mansi 11, p. 215. 21 Mansi 16, p. 53- *2 Mansi 16, pp. 65-70. 
235 


[PDF page 188]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
Eighth Council of Constantinople].** On the basis of the same 
principle, the [canon law] texts of the same Nicholas, C. 9 q. 3 [c. 10] 
Patet [and] C. 17 q. 4 [c. 30] Nemini, say that the opinion of the pope 
can be overruled by no one. If it were incorrect, it could be overruled 
and in [case of] doubt, it is reviewed by the universal council. Hence 
in the fourth action of the Eighth Ecumenical Council when the 
representatives of the Apostolic See opposed a review of the judicial 
decisions of Pope Nicholas in his synod, the princes and senators 
insisted upon it saying that they would not subscribe as witnesses to 
the acts of the Council unless those who had been judged by the 
[papal] synod were admitted to answer for those decisions. And 
Metrophanes, the metropolitan of Smyrna arose and said, ““When we 
consider the words of the most excellent princes, we find them just 
and fitting. All the bishops of this holy synod also favor this.””* Note 
that by decree of the universal council, the decision of Pope Nicholas 
and his council on [the case of] Photius was reviewed and approved 
again, despite the opposition of the representatives of the bishop of 
Rome. 
177. This clearly proves the supremacy of the universal council over 
the pope and his patriarchal synod. Thus Pope Leo writing to all the 
bishops in all the provinces says of the letters of all his predecessors: 
“We command that you observe all the decretals adopted both by 
Innocent of blessed memory and by all my other predecessors, which 
have been promulgated concerning ecclesiastical legislation and the 
teachings of the canons. If anyone contravenes them, he will know 
that pardon will be denied him,” see D. 19 [c. 1] Si Romanorum. Pope 
Damasus speaks in the same way in [C.] 25 q. 1 [c. 12] Omnium. And 
Hincmar, discussing this letter in his work against the bishop of Laon 
says that it should be noted that to promulgate is to reveal to the 
people [vulgo promere].° Those popes do not speak of the simple 
promulgation of laws and canons but of decretals promulgated con- 
cerning the teachings of the canons. Hence when they go against the 
canons, it is the canons that are rather to be obeyed, see D. 19 /ta 
Dominus {after c. 7] para. Hoc autem with the gloss and the canon [c. 8] 
Secundum para. Quia ergo, where it is proved that the canons of the 
ancients are of greater authority than the decretals of the Roman 
pontiffs that go against them, however much modern canon lawyers 
may criticize Gratian on that point. 
*3 Mansi 16, p. 109. *4 Mansi 16, p. 55. 25 PL 126, p. 316. 
136 


[PDF page 189]
Book IT, para. 179 
178. And this is a further proof: It is obvious that the decree of a 
synod which includes the authorized representatives of the Roman 
pontiff, possesses an authority which is greater than, or at least equal 
to, the decretals of the pope. But these councils are called provincial 
councils in D. 3 [after c. 2] para. Porro or by another designation, local 
councils, in [C.] 1 q. 7 [c. 4] Convenientibus. But there is no doubt that 
provincial councils can be corrected by universal councils, as is shown 
above. The text is [C.] 2 q. 7 [c. 35] Puto para. Item: Cum Petrus, in 
which St. Augustine says that the statute of a universal council is to be 
preferred to the authority of one bishop or a provincial council. That 
text is very pertinent to this point as is clear from the following 
quotation: “If Paul corrected Peter, therefore, a fortiori, the authority 
of the universal council, etc.” [Pope] Innocent [I] writes in the same 
way of the canons of Nicaea and Sardica, and [Pope] Boniface writes 
to Rusticus of Narbonne that all must believe that the holy fathers in 
Nicaea adopted their canons by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and 
adds: “‘So that your holiness [lit. — charity] may observe there that we 
keep the precepts of the canons and so that our legislation may define 
matters in a similar way... .”*° 
179. ‘This is also said in the letter of Celestine to all the bishops in 
Calabria.’” And Pope Leo [I] says to Anatole of Constantinople, ‘““The 
Nicene canons will remain until the end of the world as adopted by 
the holy fathers who live on among us through their laws, and if 
anyone presumes to legislate otherwise, the law is nullified immedi- 
ately.” In the same letter he says, “The clauses of the Nicene canons 
which have been ordained by the Holy Spirit are never to be relaxed 
in any way since that holy synod is endowed with such divine privilege 
that any ecclesiastical decision whether made by few or many, which 
departs from their content is completely devoid of all authority.”’* He 
also writes to Maximus of Antioch: “Any case involving synodal mat- 
ters can be examined and decided by the bishop if nothing was 
defined on the subject by the holy fathers at Nicaea. But nothing that 
departs from their laws and rules can have the consent of the Apos- 
tolic See.’ And he also writes to Anastasius: “There can be no 
departure from the rules adopted earlier, either by reason of negli- 
gence or of presumption.”*” And [Pope] Gelasius in a general decree 
6 PL, 20, pp. 503ff. and 20, pp. 773ff. (to Hilarius). 
aaah 50, p. 436. SPL, 54, pp. 1005 and 1003. 
27 Pleas ane se 20,PT) 54, p: 672. 
137 


[PDF page 190]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
to all the bishops says: “Since for our part we wish to allow nothing 
contrary to reverence for the norms of salvation, ...’*! 
[Decretals| De consecratione, D. 1 {c. 6| Basilicas, where the accompany- 
ing text has a gloss which declares that the whole body of the church 
should observe the canons since the Roman church which is supreme 
strives with pious and devout purpose to preserve the canons and 
would not relax them for anyone even for a possible good reason. 
Likewise [Pope] Hormisda writes to Remigius, the holy archbishop 
of Rheims: ‘“‘We command that the regulations of the fathers, the 
decrees defined by the most holy councils should be observed by all. 
Guard them with the proper reverence. Their strict observance allows 
no possibility for blame. They prescribe right and wrong. They pro- 
hibit what no one would dare desire.””** 
180. From this it is sufficiently clear that the opinion of the ancients 
was not that the pope cannot be bound by the ecumenical councils, 
but rather that he of all men, as the head, has always observed the 
rules handed down by the universal councils; and the popes have also 
acknowledged that they ought to observe them. Pope Fabian says in 
[C.] 11 q. 3 [c. 95]: “He who has feared almighty God does not 
consent to do anything against the gospel of Christ, the apostles, the 
prophets, or the statutes of the holy fathers.” Observe that the Roman 
pontiffs who fear God do not consent to do anything against the 
statutes of the holy fathers. 
181. In addition the same point is proved by another argument. It is 
clear that Pope Leo did not accept what appears in certain parts of the 
decrees of the Council of Chalcedon, in particular the decree that 
Constantinople should precede Alexandria.*’ He always protested as 
did other popes after him but still the decree of the Council prevailed, 
as is clear from [Decretals v 33] De privilegiis, [c. 23] Antiqua and D. 22 
[c. 6] Renovantes and the sessions and signatures of the councils after 
Chalcedon. But if the pope had it in his power to revoke the decrees 
of the universal councils, Leo and some of his successors would have 
prevailed. But this is not true, as indicated above. It is to be noted that 
although as Hincmar relates at length in the book referred to above, 
Pope Leo was opposed to three canons in the decrees of the Council 
of Chalcedon, he did not oppose them on the basis of his own 
authority but on that of the canons of the Nicene council which he 
= Ce 
31 PL. 56, p. 692. 32PL 63, p. 369. 33PL, 54, pp. 1001ff, 
138 


[PDF page 191]
Book I, para. 183 
wished to preserve from violation, and he said that the observance of 
those canons was his responsibility and that the later canons con- 
tradicted them.** Similarly the Council of Africa opposed [Pope] 
Celestine because he wished to act in violation of a canon of the 
Nicene Council, and Celestine did not say that he could do this but 
alleged that the council cited the [Nicene] Council incorrectly in 
support of its argument because it did not have a properly translated 
text, as appears in the letter of the Council of Africa to Pope 
Celestine, bishop of the city of Rome, which begins: Demino dilectis- 
simo.*> Furthermore, returning to the case of Leo, since the authority 
of all universal councils is one, see D. 16 [c. 8] Sancta, he also did not 
prevail on the point concerning the order of listing of the patriarchal 
sees, as is clear from the above. 
182. In addition, to introduce a more recent example, the universal 
Council of Basel decreed in its second session that the Roman pontiff 
also may not violate the canon Frequens of the Council of Constance 
by transferring its location, although there is no decree of invalidity 
[irritans| against [an action of] the Roman pontiff in that same canon, 
Frequens.*° It is well to emphasize here that there is no doubt that this 
happened under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. This can be con- 
cluded from the firm character of the conciliar actions, for St. 
Augustine in his book, On the Trinity, against Felix, argues against the 
Council of Rimini from the inconstancy of its defenders.*’ 
183. We see that by the grace of God the Council of Basel has now 
been strengthened in a marvelous way — although at the beginning it 
was convulsed by doubt and fluctuation -, and this can come only 
from God who is lasting truth. Therefore let us firmly believe that all 
its actions from the beginning were inspired by the Holy Spirit. It is 
sufficiently marvelous that on the basis of the canon Frequens of the 
Council of Constance, it turned in its first session to three matters; 
the uprooting of heresies, the reformation of the morals of the whole 
church, and peace among Christians.** The Holy Spirit undoubtedly 
inspired these actions so that if perhaps the pope wished to resist, 
34PL 126, pp. 360ff. 
35 Mansi 4, p. §15. 
36 Mansi 29, pp. 3ff. and 564ff. The debate at Basel in the first part of 1433 on whether the 
council could nullify papal actions through a decree of invalidity (7rritans) was one of the 
reasons for the writing of the Concordantia. See Introduction. 
37 See discussion in u, ch. 5, no. 82. 
38] e., variations on the three topics cited by the Council of Constance in Frequens (1417). 
139 


[PDF page 192]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
there would be no doubt as to the universality of the council. On these 
three matters there had already been a definitive and immutable 
decree in the Council of Constance. And so by divine inspiration the 
Council [of Basel] concerned itself with this before any difficulty 
arose. There followed the supposed transfer or, more accurately, 
dissolution of the Council by the pope. Afterwards the second session 
of the Council took place which concluded its argument in an admir- 
able syllogism as follows: The pope is bound to obey all reform 
decrees. The canon, Frequens, is a reform decree. Therefore he is 
obliged to obey it. The major premise is the decree of the Council of 
Constance and the minor premise is proven by the text of the decree, 
Frequens. Thus the conclusion is that he is bound to obey it. There- 
fore he is subject to it. Therefore he cannot abrogate or change it. 
184. If there is no doubt that the Holy Spirit dictated this syllogism 
to this holy Council, what need is there to doubt or dispute further 
whether the pope can be bound by the reform decrees so that he 
cannot contravene them? Likewise if the Council of Constance says 
that a pope who does not obey can be punished,” then its force as a 
council does not depend entirely on the pope because if there were no 
council whenever he did not wish there to be one, how could he ever 
be punished since only a council can punish him? Likewise the decree 
adopted by the Councils of Constance and Siena says that the fathers 
gathered at Basel at this time are a true council.*” The pope says that 
since he does not wish there to be a council, it is not a true council. 
Who then is so insane as to say that the opinion of the council, in 
which necessarily the authority of the Roman pontiff was included, is 
false and the will of Pope Eugene true? If when the decrees of the 
aforesaid councils were reissued at Basel, the Holy Spirit said that it 
wished to inspire the Council at this time, how can Pope Eugene say 
that this is true [only] if he wishes it to be and not otherwise? As if the 
inspiration of the Holy Spirit were in the power of the Roman pontiff 
so that it would grant its inspiration only when the pope wished. If you 
recall that the holy fathers live on in their laws, and that the church is 
one, with some dying and others succeeding in their place, and that 
the universal councils also succeed one another in the same way, then 
you [will] easily understand the foregoing. 
185. We should not deny, however, that the Roman pontiff can 
3° Mansi 27, p. 590. #9 Mansi 27, p. 1195, and 28, p. 1070. 
140 


[PDF page 193]
Book IT, para. 186 
make sure of the power of equity [epieikeia]. For we read in the first 
action of the Eighth Council that Hadrian wrote as follows: “To 
quote Pope Gelasius, it is necessary and convenient for the govern- 
ment of the Apostolic See for us to weigh the decrees of the canons of 
the fathers and to judge the precepts of our predecessors so that as far 
as possible after careful consideration we may modify what present 
necessity requires to be relaxed for the renewal of the church. For we 
too can act with equity for the benefit of the brethren and imitate him 
[Gelasius] directly in considering the requirements of the times.”*! 
This appears in [C.] 1 q. 7 [c. 5] Necessaria and in the paragraph Nisi 
rigor. 
186. Note that as it says, it is to be understood that the law’s 
provisions are to be modified “as far as possible after careful con- 
sideration” as to whether it is necessary and useful for the renewal of 
the church. And on this, note the paragraph [after c. 8] Sed sciendum 
of D. 61 along with the gloss upon it, as well as the gloss on [C.] 1 q. 1 
[c. 41] Quod propter necessitatem to the effect that when ecclesiastical 
prohibitions are made for certain reasons, if those reasons cease and 
the law does not cease to oblige since it is general, suspension of the 
law is appropriate. For to go against a general prohibition in a particu- 
lar case when necessity or utility advises it because the reason for the 
law is no longer present is not really a suspension of the law, but a 
declaration that that case is not included in the scope of the law, see 
D. 28 [c. 13] De Syracusanae. But because the reasons given for a 
declaration, interpretation, dispensation, or suspension should in fact 
lead to the conclusion that a suspension or declaration or modification 
would be appropriate, the holy Council of Basel, after finding that the 
reasons given in the bull of dissolution or transfer issued by Pope 
Eugene were not really conclusive, declared the pope’s action invalid 
since it violated the canon Frequens of the Council of Constance and 
because the reasons cited in the bull were inadequate and conse- 
quently he could not transfer it [the council]. I do not say, however, 
that if the reasons had been valid he would have been able to do it on 
his own authority without the consent of the council but that if they 
had been valid, he could have done so because the council would have 
consented. And this is proven in the fourth action of the Eighth 
Universal Council where, in a letter to Photius in answer to his 
41 Mansi 16, p. 21. #2 Mansi 29, pp. 24ff. 
141 


[PDF page 194]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
objection that in the Second Council Nectarius had been appointed 
as a layman to the bishopric of Constantinople, Pope Nicholas says 
that necessity was the reason for the dispensation, and adds that the 
Second Council neither confirmed the practice nor agreed that it 
might be done again, because what was clearly done out of necessity 
in violation of the laws of the fathers and the canon law should not be 
cited as an authority. And below he says, “You see, Nectarius was 
appointed to rule the church because of the need for priests, T'arasius 
for reasons of church dogma and the expulsion of the heretics who 
dared to destroy the venerable images, and Ambrose because of 
miraculous signs.”’* 
187. From this we conclude that necessity, utility, and miracles are 
conclusive reasons for modifying a law or general canon, see D. 55 [c. 
1| Priscis. But the Old Gloss commenting on [C.] 1 q. 1 [c. 41] Quod 
propter necessitatem says “because of necessity,” “because of utility,” 
on [C.] 1 q. 1 [c. 24: Dahibertum; “out of mercy,” on C. 1 q. 5 [c. 3] 
the last canon, “because of widespread custom,” on D. 4 [c. 6] 
Denique: “by reason of numbers,” on [C.] 23 q. 4 [c. 32] Non potest. 
The common law is also often violated when dispensations are given 
because of necessity or utility contrary to the Council of Nicaea which 
prohibited changes and transfers of sees. This is proven in [C.] 7 q. 1 
[c. 34] Mutationes and in the following canon. As to necessity there is 
no doubt, because necessity is not subject to human legislation, [and] 
even excuses what is done against such legislation, see De Consecra- 
tione D. x [c. 36] Sicut and D. 4 [c. 36] Sanctum. However, action on 
the basis of utility should be taken with caution so that the canons are 
not suspended for any reason of utility whatever, as Pope Gelasius 
says in De Consecratione D. 1 [c. 6] Basilicas. Hence Pope Nicholas in 
[C.] 35 q. 9 [c. 6] Sententiam says that the Roman church can grant 
dispensations for reasons of age, time, and grave necessity, as did St. 
Paul. However he says they should be granted if the Roman church 
has chosen with all due consideration to do so but not because it 
wishes to repeal well defined laws. And this text is to be noted 
because as the Gloss on [C.] 22 q. 2 [c. 15] Faciat says, power is to be 
exercised for good purposes, and on that dispensation we should note 
[what is said in] D. 61, [after c. 8] Sed sciendum and the Gloss on the 
paragraph Hiis omnibus in the same place. It cannot be denied that the 
+3 Mansi 16, pp. 7off. 
142 


[PDF page 195]
Book I, para. 1&8 
pope can dispense from any statute for reasons of necessity or evident 
utility. The Archdeacon in his lengthy comment on D. 70 [c. 2] 
Sanctorum even says that a bishop can do so. He says among other 
things that if any canon were to prohibit this, it would be irrational 
and he gives examples of bishops who have given dispensations from 
provincial or universal councils for these reasons. But besides this the 
pope can dispense out of his personal prerogative — which he discus- 
ses in the same place. 
188. And from this it follows that the power of supervision of the 
canons which the pope possesses for the benefit of the church is not, 
properly speaking, a power over the canons but the authority to 
declare for reasonable cause that the canons do not apply in a particu- 
lar case. And thus a dispensation is not actually in its root meaning a 
suspension of the law but a declaration that the suspension of the law 
is only apparent [not real]. Therefore if valid reasons are not present 
to demonstrate that a given case is not under the law, it is not a case of 
dispensation but of dissolution. Indeed according to what has been 
said, anyone who is [thus] dispensed since he is subject to the canon 
and cannot be exempted from observing it except for valid, substan- 
tial, and reasonable cause, is still subject to the penalties and com- 
mand of the law, even if the pope intended to exempt him by 
dispensation since in the eyes of God he is bound by it like anyone 
else. However the church militant may not judge this because, in the 
case of the pope, it is assumed that he did it legitimately and justifiably 
for valid and reasonable motives. And this is what the gloss on the 
word adimplere of the chapter Non est in [the Decretals 11 34] De Voto 
[c. 5] says, as do all the doctors. On this as well as on what is said 
above concerning the universal council the excellent text of Pope 
Pelagius in the [papal] Register should be noted, which reads as fol- 
lows, “Pope Pelagius to the patrician Valerian: If the bishops of those 
parts have any doubt about the condemnation of the Three Chapters, 
let them follow the ancient custom and either elect learned men from 
among them or let any bishop come for himself and, after receiving by 
God’s grace an appropriate explanation from us, let him return to the 
bosom of our common mother, the holy Catholic church. For as to 
the proposal of Your Highness that we should meet and form a quasi- 
synod no canons have permitted or will permit that, after the decision 
by a universal council which was made as with one voice by nearly 
four thousand bishops, both through their metropolitans and 
143 


[PDF page 196]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
individually at Constantinople, a particular council should meet and 
should return to discord among ourselves. Rather whenever any 
doubt arises on matters involving the universal council those who 
desire the salvation of their souls can come spontaneously, or because 
they desire an explanation of what they do not understand, to their 
apostolic see to receive an explanation. If perhaps, as Scripture says of 
such people, ‘when the sinner sinks to the depth of evil, he is defiant,’ 
they become obstinate and contumacious and do not wish to learn, 
they must be led to salvation in some way by those apostolic sees or 
they must be repressed by the secular powers in accordance with the 
canons so as not to be a source of perdition for others. Given the 12th 
of May in the 17th year after the consulate of the great Basil.”** This 
decretal of Pelagius is important because it says that a definition by an 
ecumenical council is final and that the pope should not decide and 
resolve doubtful cases for petitioners in cases involving matters 
defined by the ecumenical councils. This decretal is very relevant to 
our earlier discussion of the authority of the councils, as well as for 
what is said thereafter, that papal dispensations from the universal 
canons do not involve a declaration of doctrine. 
189. In order for there to be a proper examination of cases cardinals 
should be appointed by this sacred council as the representatives of 
the provinces in the way described above, and the cases should be 
examined with their advice and written authorization as to whether it 
is fitting to act in a given way. At one time the Roman pontiffs were 
accustomed to promise publicly in their declarations that they would 
carry out their office with the counsel and consent of the cardinals, as 
appears in the declaration of Boniface VIII. 
Therefore to conclude, — to prove that except for his power of 
equity [epierkeia| already discussed, the Roman pontiff is normally 
bound to obey the canons of the ecumenical councils, let it be noted 
that the first canon of the Eighth Council declares that the canons are 
given to the universal church by the universal councils, and then 
states that the Universal Council promises to observe them. And it is 
evident that the representatives of the Apostolic See and all the others 
subscribed to this canon and to all the other canons of that council, as 
appears clearly at the end of the same council where it says, “We 
Jaffe, p. 1018. The scriptural citation is to Proverbs 18:3. Pope Pelagius ruled from A.D. 
555 to 560. The Three Chapters were theological works condemned by the Fifth 
Ecumenical Council at Constantinople in 553. 
144 


[PDF page 197]
Book IT, para. 190 
[will] observe these apostolic and synodal documents without excep- 
tion.”* And a little later, the very reverend representatives of old 
Rome said, “Because by the providence of God all the concerns of 
the church have come to a successful conclusion, we should also 
confirm these things in writing with our own hands according to the 
procedure of the synod.”** There is no doubt that the pope is a 
faithful member of the universal church and that he is obliged by his 
declaration of faith and signature. The text is as follows: First the title 
speaks of the canons set forth above and given to the church to be 
kept and observed everywhere. [Then] the text continues, “If we wish 
to follow without offense the true way of royal divine justice, we 
should always maintain what has been defined by the holy fathers as 
ever-burning lamps to guide our footsteps in the way of God. There- 
fore like the wise Dionysius we consider them as the second word [of 
God] and with the divine David we zealously sing of them. “The 
command of God is as a light to the eyes’ and “Thy law is a lantern to 
my feet and a light to my footsteps.’ And with the author of Proverbs 
we say, ‘His command is a lantern, and his law a light.’ And with the 
great Isaiah, we cry to the God of all, ‘Thy precepts are a light on the 
earth.’*” For the exhortations and prohibitions of the divine canons 
are rightly compared to a light by which the better is distinguished 
from worse, and the useful and profitable from that which is 
recognized as useless and harmful. Therefore we declare that we will 
preserve and guard the norms that have been handed down to the 
holy, Catholic, and apostolic church by the most holy and glorious 
apostles and by the universal orthodox councils. We will govern our 
own life and conduct by them and we decree that the entire priest- 
hood and all who are called Christians are to be punished and con- 
demned or, conversely, absolved and justified in accordance with 
what is expressed and defined in the canons. Indeed the great Apostle 
Paul clearly advises us to hold to the traditions that we have received 
whether by word or by letter from the saints whose brilliance has 
preceded us.”** 
190. Note here the very clear declaration that normally the pope is 
bound by the regulations made by the universal councils. Therefore 
* Mansi 16, pp. 398ff. 
*© Mansi 16, pp. 185, 188. 
‘7 Proverbs 18:9; Psalms 118 and 105; Isaiah 6:23. 
485 Thessalonians 2:15. Mansi 16, pp. 16off. 
145 


[PDF page 198]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
an injunction may be placed on him by the universal council to follow 
them under threat of invalidity and grave penalty except in the case of 
the exercise of equity powers [epieikeia] as discussed above. ‘Today 
however when — alas! — the universal church is reduced to the Roman 
patriarchate alone,*’ and what once was only the general patriarchal 
council subject to the Roman pontiff, is today the universal council 
representing the whole church of the faithful, in this new situation 
doubt has arisen on this point. Therefore it is appropriate for this holy 
council to act without passion and with the greatest gentleness 
towards the Roman pontiff. Let it not be so proud of its privileged 
position as a universal council — which, alas, is rather a reason to 
lament -, that it forgets its subordination in the past to its patriarch 
when it could not act against an orthodox pope. Rather let due honor 
be given and all things ordered in peace by unanimous concordance 
for the increase of faith and divine worship and the universal good of 
the Catholic church so that they may see our good works and glorify 
God who is in heaven. 
*° Cusanus’ belief that the pope offered the best possibilities for reunion with the Eastern 
church was a major reason for his abandonment of the Basel Council in 1437. 
CHAPTER XxXI 
THE POPE SHOULD NOT EXERCISE HIS POWER OF 
DISPENSATION OR TAKE ANY ACTION WHICH SEEMS 
CONTRARY TO THE UNIVERSAL CANONS WITHOUT 
CONSULTING THE CARDINALS. 
1gt. I think that only one thing should be added to what is said 
above; that this holy council could adopt a law — or more accurately 
revive the ancient law that provides that the pope cannot take any 
action on difficult cases — especially a dispensation for urgent reasons 
from the canons of this or other universal councils — without [the 
consent of] the lord cardinals in their quality as the clergy represent- 
ing the universal church in the way described above. If he should act 
otherwise, that action is to be invalid. The opinions of the Arch- 
deacon and of Joannes Monachus and of others on this have been 
146 


[PDF page 199]
Book IT, para. 192 
cited already.’ Their final conclusion on this is to affirm the principle 
that the pope cannot do anything affecting the universal church 
without the [consent of the] cardinals. But I believe that to violate or 
dispense from the canons, even in a particular case, can reasonably be 
said to concern the universal church, since a canon of the universal 
church seems to be violated by this kind of dispensation. 
Hence because an argument from analogy is a strong one in law, 
see [C.] 3 q. 5 [c. 15] Quia suspecti; D. 20 In quibus; D. 10 [c. 7] Si in 
adiutorium, 1 will add the following argument from analogy here. 
Legally a bishop has complete administrative control of his diocese 
with its churches, endowments, and tithes, see [C.] 10 q. 1 [c. 3] 
Decretum, but he does not have the right to transfer, give, or exchange 
the things over which he has power without the consent and written 
agreement of his clergy, see C. 12 q. 2 [c. 52] Sine exceptione. And the 
32nd canon of the African Council says: “The donation, sale, or 
exchange of ecclesiastical property by the bishops without the 
approval and written agreement of the clergy shall be invalid.’ 
Therefore by analogy, even if the whole church were subject to the 
disposition of the pope as a single monarch, nevertheless according to 
the above he could not exchange or transfer church property — especi- 
ally, I believe, the sacred canons — without the consent and written 
agreement of his clergy. For the cardinals act in the name of the 
clergy of the Roman church in so far as the Roman church is mon- 
archical in structure, as is said in a certain place above.* 
192. Furthermore it is clear that the transfer of church property can 
only take place for reasons of utility and necessity. Exactly the same 
thing is true of changes in the canons or dispensation from them. And 
that is enough for the argument from analogy. This is discussed in the 
chapter Non liceat [c. 20] of [C.] 12 q. 2, a text which seems to 
compare the pope to the other bishops with respect to the right to 
transfer property. Furthermore the African synod which Augustine 
signed says in [C.] 15 q. 7 [c. 6] Episcopus: “Let no bishop hear a case 
except in the presence of his clergy; otherwise the sentence of the 
bishop will be invalid.’* And it is clear that the bishop has 
' Book m1, nos. 132, 163, 166. 
Fourth Council of Carthage (Hinschius, p. 304). 
3 Book u, no. 132. 
*See note 2. For Nicholas’ source in Beno, Gesta Romanae Ecclesiae, see Werner Krimer, 
“Verzeichnis der Briisseler Handschriften,” 1F CG, 14 (1980), 182-197. 
147 


[PDF page 200]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
administrative control of his entire diocese but he cannot hear cases 
and pass serious sentences except in the presence of his clergy. 
Therefore it is obvious that the pope is obliged to act in a similar way 
on matters concerning the universal church. 
Furthermore exchanges or transfers by a presiding church auth- 
ority cannot be made except with the advice of the council or all the 
priests, see [C.] 12 q. 2 [c. 51] Placuit where it says: “Without con- 
sulting the council or priests .. .” and the canon [58] Episcopus where 
it says: “In front of the council of the church ...” Therefore in the 
same way the pope cannot transfer the property of the church without 
the consent of the council of the church, i.e. the universal council. 
Principally included in this property, it is evident, are the sacred 
canons. 
193. Hence although the cardinals can agree in particular cases for 
reasons of necessity or utility, to actions opposed to the canons and 
can confirm dispensations with their signatures, this can be done, I 
believe, only without prejudice to the [continued force of the] canons. 
But in my view, the pope and cardinals can not repeal the canons of 
the universal councils without the consent of the universal council. 
And in a case in which the cardinals have to give their consent, any [of 
the cardinals] can participate in the decision but a_ particular 
individual does not have the right to decide by himself, for that right 
belongs only to the college as a whole and not to any individual 
member of the college, according to the note of the doctors following 
[Pope] Innocent on the chapter /rrefragabili [c. 13] Conquestus [Exces- 
sus] in [Decretals 1 31| De officio ordinarii and this is proven in [C.] 12 q. 
2 [after c. 58] Qui manumittitur, following the Digest [111 4] Quod cuius, 
verse Sicut [1.7] para. 1. For we read the following in the proceedings 
against Hildebrand who was called Pope Gregory VII: “For it is the 
privilege of the Roman see that through its cardinals, bishops, and 
deacons it assists the pontiff or representative of that see who is the 
one whom that most sacred see makes its spokesman, through whom 
and by whom it preaches, through whom it administers the sacra- 
ments, through whom and by whom it approves what ought to be 
approved and rejects what should be rejected. However, without the 
agreement of the see, the opinion of the pontiff is invalid.’> Note that 
from ancient times, the opinion of the Roman pontiff was invalid 
°Pope Gregory VII (1073-1085) was a reforming pope who opposed simony and lay 
investiture. 
148 


[PDF page 201]
Book I, para. 195 
without the agreement of the cardinals, and that the pope was only the 
spokesman of the Apostolic See. 
CHAPTER XXII 
DHE PROVINGLALYS YN ODES HOULD BE CALLED BY 
THE METROPOLITAN WHO TS THE JUDGE OF THE 
PROVINCE AETHOUGH HE CAN NOT DECIDE 
CRIMINAL CASES BY HIMSELF. COUNCILS ARE WISE 
AND NECESSARY INSTITUTIONS CREATED FOR THE 
GOODIOR THE CHURCH? THENUNIVERSA Ey COUN GLE 
MADEFUP OF SEVERALSRROVINGES TS <DISiGUSSED 
ANDES ARGUED DEAT Lis SWPP ERLOR AL © 
PAR TE WARP ROVINGTALIGOUN CIES. LOCAL 
PUPDLEGI NCSC TE © RIES SEO WD Mir Ei IN DH ESE 
COUNCILS AND THEY SHOULD NOT END WITHOUT 
1G Ea LV IESY SUONKGe APISha, IAG AMC Aa TON a ISNA Ansa aC28 
MEETING AND DECIDING EVERYTHING BROUGHT 
BEFORE? HEV, 
194. Let us briefly add a few things regarding provincial councils so 
as to have a better understanding of the universal councils, the 
principal matter under consideration. The provincial council of a 
province consists of the metropolitan and his suffragans and others in 
the province. It is called by the archbishop to make decisions on 
matters of concern to the province. Without this it is not a full and 
perfect council, for he [the archbishop] has the care and responsibility 
for the whole province. In it he ranks first in honor, and appeals are 
made to him, see [C.] 9 q. 3 [c. 2] Per singulos. Although he is the 
judge of the province, he should not decide criminal cases or general 
cases which concern all the bishops of the province without the 
participation of the suffragan bishops, see [C.] 15 q. 7 [c. 6] Episcopus 
nullus and the canon Felix [c. 4] and the observations in [C.] 9 q. 3 [c. 
3] Cum simus and the final paragraph [Probatur]. But as to how he 
should discuss the common affairs of the province with his suffragans, 
see [C.] 9 q. 3 Per singulas canons 1 and 2, and many other places. 
195. ‘This council is very necessary and it has authority given to it by 
149 


[PDF page 202]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
the ecumenical councils to decide and ordain all things necessary for 
the province except for those that concern the church as a whole, 
which require a greater authority. How useful this and other councils 
would be to the church of God, we read in the third chapter of the 
Council of Toledo where it says: “Hardly any matter of discipline 
does more harm to the good work of the church of Christ than the 
negligence of priests who, in contempt of the canons, fail to hold a 
synod to improve moral conduct in the church. For this reason, it has 
been generally defined by us that since time does not permit a council 
to be convened twice a year in accord with the ancient decrees of the 
fathers, a council is to be held at least once a year. If there is a case 
involving doctrine or any other matter of common concern to the 
church, a general synod of all Spain or Gaul may be called, but if 
neither doctrine nor matters of common interest of the church are to 
be discussed, let a particular council be held as the metropolitan of 
each province decides. But let all who are known to have cases against 
bishops or judges or authorities or against anyone else come to this 
council and anything found on examination by the synod to have been 
criminally usurped by anyone, is to be returned by the king’s officer to 
those to whom it belongs by legal right. Indeed the metropolitan 
should request a royal executive officer from the prince to compel the 
judges and laymen to come to the metropolitan synod. A synod should 
be held in each province on the fifteenth day of June, in the spring 
when the earth is covered with grass and crops are growing.” 
Note that this decree was issued in a certain universal council of all 
Spain and Gaul, and applies to the provinces subject to that council, 
and that it also says that doctrinal questions and those that affect the 
whole church should be discussed in this kind of universal council. 
From this we conclude that a universal synod made up of many 
provinces is over those provinces and can also treat general cases of 
doctrine. And these things should be noted on account of what is said 
below. 
196. Inan earlier universal council which was also held at Toledo, it 
was decided that provincial councils should be held in the autumn at 
the beginning of November, and that the local judges and tax-collec- 
tors should meet by decree of the king so as to learn to act worthily 
Fourth Council of Toledo — A.D. 633 (Mansi 10, p- 616ff.). The Council was quoted 
earlier by Gulielmus Durandus in his work, De modo celebrandi concilium generale (1311), 
which is in the library at Kues. 
150 


[PDF page 203]
Book II, para. 197 
and honestly with the people and not to overburden the individual 
citizen or vassal with heavy taxes or unnecessary obligations. It was 
also defined that the bishops should then observe how the judges act 
with the people and in cases of excess, correct or denounce them to 
the king. If they were not willing to mend their ways, they would be 
able to suspend them from communion and they would also decide on 
the penalty for a judge who did not come to the synod. And it was 
added: “But the council should not be dissolved until its members 
have first chosen the place where it will meet in the future. In this way 
it will not be necessary for the metropolitan to send letters to call the 
council if the time and place are announced to everyone at the earlier 
council meeting.” 
* Third Council of Toledo — A.D. 689 (Mansi 9, pp. 997ff.). 
CHAPTER XxIII 
THE PORM FOR THE CONDUGT OF A GOUNGIE IS 
GIVEN IN THE FOURTH CHAPTER OF THE GOUNGILE 
OP LOLEDOF LHISMS*QOUOTED WORD THOR WORD AND 
is LOSBE NOTED INTIS ENDIREDYS ESPECIALLY THE 
LAST PART. 
197. But the form in which the council should be held is defined as 
follows in the fourth chapter of the Council of Toledo which was held 
at the time of King Sisenandus in A.D. 581:' “And so at the first hour 
before sunrise let the church be emptied. With all the gates closed let 
the porters sit at one door through which the clergy will enter. Let all 
the bishops go in together and take their places in accordance with the 
date of their ordination. After all the bishops have entered and taken 
their seats, then let the priests be summoned who are needed for 
discussion of the subject. No deacons are to come in with them. After 
they come in, let the approved deacons enter whom good order 
requires to be present, and when the bishops have formed a circle 
with their seats, let the priests sit behind them, and the deacons stand 
'The Fourth Council of Toledo from which this quotation is taken was held in A.D. 633. 
151 


[PDF page 204]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
where they can be seen. Then let the laymen enter who have been 
invited by the council to participate, and then the notaries who are 
needed to read out and to record what the council does and then the 
doors are to be shut. And after the priests have been sitting for a long 
time in silence with their hearts turned only to God, let the arch- 
deacon say: ‘Let us pray.’ And at once everyone will prostrate himself 
on the floor and pray silently for a longer time with weeping and 
groaning. Let one of the elder bishops arise and pray aloud to God 
while all the others are still lying on the ground. When the prayer is 
over and all have answered ‘Amen,’ let the deacon say again, ‘Arise.’ 
And immediately let all arise and let the bishops and priests take their 
seats in fear of God and good order. And with all sitting in their 
places in silence, let a deacon clothed in a white robe bring out the 
text of the canons to the center and read the chapters on the conduct 
of a council, and when these are finished, let the metropolitan bishop 
address the council saying: ‘Most holy priests, the opinions of the 
early fathers concerning the conduct of the council have been read 
from the canons. If any of you wishes us to take any action, let him put 
it before his brothers. ‘Then if anyone has any complaint of a violation 
of a canon to bring before this sacerdotal audience, let us not pass on 
first to another chapter without first taking action on whatever is 
proposed. For if any priest or deacon or cleric or layman among those 
who have stood outside believes that he should appeal to the council 
on any subject, let him bring his case to the archdeacon of the 
metropolitan church, and he [the archdeacon] should bring it before 
the council and permission to come in and speak will be granted to 
him. And no bishop should leave the meeting before the general hour 
of departure arrives. Also let no one dare to dissolve the council 
before everything has been decided and whatever is concluded in 
common is subscribed to by the hands of each of the bishops. For we 
believe that God is present in the assembly of his priests when church 
business is concluded with care and in peace without any 
disturbance.’ ”” 
198. ‘That is the proper order [of a synod], but it is not observed 
today. At the beginning of his book on the councils, Isidore [of 
Seville] also discusses the procedure for holding a council.’ But I have 
included this canon in this small work because towards the end, it 
* Mansi 10, pp. 617ff. 3PL 130, pp. 11ff. 
152 


[PDF page 205]
Book Il, para. 199 
prohibits its dissolution, and in the last section it says that we should 
believe that God is present in a council when church matters are 
concluded with care and in peace. Hence we may make an argument 
on the basis of the conclusion of a council because even if it has been 
correctly assembled and everything has been discussed fairly, prop- 
erly, and at length, if it does not end peacefully it can not always truly 
be said that Christ was in the midst since he is not the author of 
discord but of peace.* And this should be noted in view of some of the 
things written above. 
* The division of the Council of Basel into two contending factions in 1437 was one of the 
reasons that Cusanus joined the side of the pope. 
CHAPTER XXIV 
UNIVERSAL COUNCILS OF A WHOLE NATION OR 
KINGDOM HAVE GREAT POWER AND THE RECORD 
SHOWS DHAT THEY HAVE MADE DECISIONS ON ALL 
MAUI UER'S bv be ON DE RINIT TONS OEE SAT YE. 
THIS COUNCIL DECIDES AMONG CANDIDATES POR 
DHESOPPIGCETORSRRIMA TES UN DEBD TAB OUD 
EVERYTHING THAT HAS SARIS BENIN: DHE NATION 
OR KINGDOM. IT IS ASSERTED THAT IT SHOULD 
ONLDYSBE (GALLE DI EOR GENERAL AND SERIOUS 
REASONS, AND THE PROCEDURE FOR DOING SO IS 
DESCRIBED. DULEGONGCIEIAR AU LHORIDY IS 
POSSESSEDIBY DHE REPRESEN DATIVE STOR. TEE 
PROVIN GESTAN DI THOSE WO MTAK ERR ART iN DEE 
COUNCIL. 
199. There are also other councils of a large kingdom or of a 
province which are often called universal councils. These are made 
up of all the particular provinces of that kingdom or nation and they 
are held in order to settle difficult cases of common interest, as is 
discussed above. The Second Council of Arles decreed that this kind 
of council should be convened for [the] Gauls by the bishop of Arles 
and we also find that it was convened at the request of the provinces 
153 


[PDF page 206]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
of Gaul.' Hence it is said at the beginning of the council: “Since we 
priests have met in the city of Turin at the request of the provinces of 
Gaul, and since we are deliberating in the church of that city under 
the protection and with the assistance of the Lord, let us consider 
etc.”* And when Spain and France were under one king as in the 
reigns of the Gothic Kings Recaredus, Sisenandus, and others, this 
kind of universal council was often celebrated by royal edict in Toledo 
on the model, as we read, of the universal councils of the universal 
church which were convened by the emperors. The kings also were 
often accustomed to be present along with their nobles and to sub- 
scribe to [decisions on] the Catholic faith. 
200. And we find that many solemn decrees were issued providing 
that the king should be chosen by election as well as others concern- 
ing the status of the king especially on the preservation of his life. On 
this more will be seen below.’ Many church canons were also adopted 
in these councils. And in the third chapter of the council held at the 
time of Sisenandus we read that that universal synod, in accordance 
with the decrees of the fathers which provided that there should be a 
uniform usage in a province for prayer and the administration [of the 
sacraments], commanded that the same rite should be observed in 
Gaul and Spain because they adhered to the same faith and were 
parts of the same kingdom.* 
201. We find that everything concerning the faith and important 
church controversies was decided in those councils. And always [a 
profession of] faith was recited at the beginning. We read in the 
Council of Toledo held in the time of Chintilanus, that following the 
custom of the ecumenical council, after the solemn ceremony of 
prayer was carried out, they were accustomed to give oral expression 
to the beliefs that they had in their hearts.? And in another council 
held at the time of Sisenandus we read: ‘“‘And because we are holding 
a general council, it is proper that the first utterance of our voices 
should be concerned with God, so that the efforts of ours which 
follow the profession of our faith may be carried out, as it were, upon 
a most firm foundation.”° We read that the candidates for the office of 
“Second Council of Arles” —a collection of earlier canons assembled in the fifth century 
(Hinschius, p. 325). 
Council of Turin (Mansi 3, p. 859). 3See Book 1, chs xxxvii, xli. 
*Fourth Council of Toledo (Mansi 10, p. 616). 
> Sixth Council of Toledo (Mansi 10, p. 661). 
® Mansi ro, p. 615. 
154 


[PDF page 207]
Book IT, para. 202 
primate accepted the [council’s] decision. Thus it is written in the 
Council of Turin, “That controversy between the bishops of Arles 
and Vienne who are contending before us for the honor of primate 
has been decided by the sacred synod.” It took jurisdiction over 
appeals and sentences passed by provincial councils as appears in the 
acts of the same council concerning the priest, Exsuperantius, judged 
by Bishop Triferius, and concerning the layman, Palladius, against 
the priest, Spanus, whom he charged with a serious crime.’ The 
African nation held such universal councils and others appealed to it 
— as that same council wrote in a letter to Pope Celestine — and it 
decided everything, even the transfer of bishops, as is contained in the 
27th chapter of the same council, and their deposition, and it did not 
permit appeals to the pope from the sentence of that council, but said 
that in accordance with the decision of the Nicene council, the cases 
should end there, as the same council wrote to the Roman pontiffs, 
Boniface and Zosimus.* And in the eighth chapter of the African 
Council it was commanded that a council should be held in this way 
every year: “And the council agreed that for church cases which often 
continue for a long time to the injury of the people a council should be 
called each year to which all the provinces that have primatial sees 
should send two members of their councils or more bishops if they 
choose as representatives so that there may be less rivalry and less 
expense for the hosts and that once the meeting is assembled it can 
have full authority. From Tripoli however, because of a lack of 
bishops let one bishop come.”’ This text is to be noted in two 
respects: first, because the provincial see is called a primatial see, and 
second, because the representatives of the provinces confer full auth- 
ority on the council in the name of the province — which should be 
noted regarding what was said above about the cardinals. After this 
that decree was revoked in the Council of Milevis so that the brethren 
might not be overburdened, and it was decreed that this general 
council would only be convened for an urgent case which concerned 
everyone.!” 
202. In addition once the universal council had met, if a number of 
7Mansi 3, pp. 86rff. 
8 Sixth Council of Carthage (Mansi 4, pp. 511ff.). The letter to Pope Celestine is from the 
Fourth Council of Carthage (Mansi 3, p. 953). 
’ Third Council of Carthage (Mansi 3, p. 880). 
Second Council of Milevis (Mansi 4, p. 329). 
155 


[PDF page 208]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
cases still remained to be decided and many bishops were present, 
any province that wished to do so appointed some of them as its 
representatives and the rest departed. This is what we read in chapter 
29 [27] of the Council of Milevis: “Furthermore in order to prevent 
all the bishops who have met in council from being detained too long, 
we have agreed that three judges for each province should be elected 
by the full council. And Vincentius, Fortunatus, and Clarus were 
elected from the province of Carthage, and Alipius, Augustinus, and 
Restitutus were elected from the province of Numidia,” and so on for 
the others. The text continues: “And these together with the holy 
bishop Aurelius shall take jurisdiction over all matters that arise, and 
they all agreed in writing.”'' From this we should conclude that when 
a smaller council with general powers is to be created, it should be 
made up of the representatives of those subject to it or of those who 
have the right to participate in it. Therefore the same thing should be 
done in the case of the cardinals who represent the provinces subject 
to the Roman church in its daily council. That those universal 
councils are of greater authority than the provincial councils under 
them is evident from what is written above, and the text of the Council 
of Laodicea, as well as those of Pope Martin and others that are 
contained in [C.] 6 q. 4 [c. 1-4] prove this. 
"Mansi 4, p. 334. 


[PDF page 209]
Book IT, para. 203 
CEVAVP IV EERO xa 
JUST AS THE ONE WHO CONVENES THESE 
UNIVERSAL COUNGILES AS DABIRVAEAD IS NOOLESS 
SUBJECT DO MHEM. THE POPE IS SUBJ HELO; LEE 
COUNCIL OF THE UNIVERSAL CHURCH, DESPITE 
THE EAGT GAD tie TSe GALE LED VAT EIS: COMMAND): 
JUST AS THE AUTHORITY (OR DHE DARL YS! COUNEIES 
DOES NOT DEPEND ON THOSE WHO CALLED THEM, 
NEITHER DOES THE AUTHORIDY OF THE UNIVERSAL 
CHURCH GOUNGIL DEPEND ON DHE-POPES DHERE LS 
A FINE DISCUSSION OF WHY THOSE COUNCILS 
SHOUED BE CONTINUED AND THE REASONS THAT 
THEY ARE USEFUL. 
203. The Second Council of Arles, in which the legate of Pope 
Sylvester participated, decreed that the council was to be called by the 
bishop of Arles, and yet we find that the Council of Turin passed 
judgment on him in the controversy that he had with the bishop of 
Vienne concerning the primacy. In the same way the bishop of Car- 
thage was not exempt from the judgment of the Council of Africa 
despite the fact that he had convened it and previously participated in 
it, because no one doubted the decision of Nicene Council that every 
issue which had arisen in Africa should be definitively determined by 
that council, as appears in [C.] 2 q. 6 [c. 35] Placuit.' The text there 
says that appeals should go from the council of the province of Africa 
to a general council or to the primate, not to anyone across the sea 
“except for the pope.” However the canon Placuit of the council itself 
as well as the same text as it appears in [C.] 11 q. 3 [c. 34] Placuit 
|Presbiteri| do not make an exception for the pope because the original 
text did not make this exception. Therefore the first text, [C.] 2 q. 6 
[c. 35], is in error. And many things could be added on these subjects. 
Similarly there has never been any doubt that all patriarchal 
councils even those of the Roman see are subject to the universal 
council of the universal church. And if a council of the universal 
church decided that one of the patriarchs had the power to convene 
'Hinschius, p. 322; Mansi 3, p. 861; Hinschius, p. 319. 
157 


[PDF page 210]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
such universal councils — Athanasius who attended the Nicene 
Council while not yet a bishop but worthy to be one, wrote to Pope 
Felix that the Nicene Council had given the Roman pontiff the power 
to call the council’ — this would not mean that he was exempt from the 
jurisdiction of that synod, any more than it did in the cases of the 
primates of Arles and Carthage discussed above. The universal 
councils of a kingdom or nation discussed above were not so 
dependent on the one who convened them that they would not have 
had full authority unless they were called by the one whose responsi- 
bility it was, for we read that many such councils were celebrated and 
accepted without such a convocation. Similarly in the case of the 
council of the universal church we can not say that its authority is so 
dependent on the one who convenes it that unless it is convened by 
the pope there is no council, for if this were the case, the first eight 
universal councils would not be valid, since we read that they were 
convened by the emperors, and that the Roman pontiffs like the other 
patriarchs received the sacred imperial commands to participate in 
the council or to send representatives. 
204. And this is clear from the fact that the authority to convene the 
council which is given to anyone by a council ceases once the council 
is already convened, however this may have taken place. But this 
authority operates only if the council has not been convened, because 
the one who has the power from the council to convene it may, 
according to his mandate, call it when he thinks it opportune but 
when the council has met, his mandate has been carried out. But if a 
number of churchmen were to meet without the authorization of the 
one who was responsible for calling the council, and to reject or 
exclude or not call the one appointed to do so, then it would be an 
imperfect council — in accordance with what is said above. But if the 
need to convene the council were made known to the one appointed 
to do so and he did not care to call it or to meet with the others to take 
action on the urgent need who would doubt that, provided that the 
proper procedure is otherwise followed, those present could provide 
for the difficulties of the church despite that objection? For when the 
welfare of the church is involved necessity, which has no law, answers 
all possible arguments to the contrary from positive law. 
205. And such a reform needs to be carried out in the provincial 
2 PI 13)/p. 12. 
158 


[PDF page 211]
Book Il, para. 207 
and universal synods of every kingdom or nation. As the canon of the 
Council of Sardica contained in [C.] 2 q. 6 [c. 36] says, all matters 
even the deposition of bishops, however they may have originated, 
should be settled in the councils and when appeals have been made to 
the Apostolic See that, even then, all cases should be settled in the 
place where the case arose, according to the form outlined above, with 
specially appointed papal commissioners participating in the synod. 
And it is also very useful for provincial synods to be held on a regular 
basis and for it to be possible to appeal first from a council of a 
suffragan bishop not to the pope but, if necessary, to the provincial 
synod, or to the universal national councils of France, Spain, and 
Germany. And these councils should be reestablished out of zeal for 
the preservation of the commonwealth and the furtherance of national 
peace and mutual love. 
206. And the Roman pontiff should not take this command ill since 
as the fathers of the Council of Africa wrote to Pope Celestine, ““The 
decrees of the Council of Nicaea clearly committed the clergy of 
lower rank and the bishops to their metropolitans. For in their 
wisdom and justice they saw that all matters ought to be settled in the 
areas in which they had arisen where the providence of the Holy 
Spirit would provide for each case because the priests of Christ would 
perceive, and adhere to the just course with wisdom and constancy — 
especially since anyone who objects to the decision of the judges can 
appeal to the council of his own province or to the universal council — 
unless perhaps there is someone who believes that God can guarantee 
justice to any one individual judging a case but deny it to many 
gathered in council.””* 
207. Therefore the Roman pontiff ought to be content if matters are 
discussed by the councils in this way and should not insist that every- 
thing be reviewed by himself and set his judgment over that of many 
priests who have the authority to define and decide from divine law 
and the Council of Nicaea. The Roman pontiff should be properly 
satisfied if the [canon of the] Council of Sardica cited above is 
accepted by all provinces. In the Council of Africa, this was incor- 
rectly alleged by the legates of the Apostolic See, Faustinus and 
others, to be a statute of the Council of Nicaea and not accepted as 
such by the Council [of Africa], as is clear in the letter of the same 
3 Sixth Council of Carthage (Mansi 4, p. 516). 
159 


[PDF page 212]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
Council to Pope Boniface* and in the letter to Celestine mentioned 
above. It is true that the fathers of the Council of Africa, among whom 
was Saint Augustine, wrote in the aforesaid letter to Celestine that the 
statute which Gratian ascribes to the Council of Sardica was not 
adopted by any council of the fathers. Hence there is some doubt as to 
whether the statute of the Council of Sardica is genuine. Therefore 
the pope ought to be all the more content if out of respect for the holy 
Roman church we accept a statute everywhere which the Synod of 
Africa would not admit, even if there is doubt as to which council, if 
any, adopted it. And in these and other matters let this holy synod [of 
Basel] with God’s guidance find an intermediate position appropriate 
to the time and place, so that if any errors have been committed 
because of an excess of obedience, following the teaching of St. 
Gregory in [C.] 2 q. 7 [c. 57] Admonendi, they will not be encouraged 
further but will be combatted, as appears in the text of St. Jerome 
Sancta quippe [C. 56] quoted in the same place, and in [C.] 11 q. 3 [c. 
99| Quod Ergo, |and] D. 86 [c. 4] Quando. This should be sufficient on 
this subject. 
*Mansi 4, p. 511. 
CHAPTER XXVI 
THE POWER GIVEN [LO THE PRIESTHOOD BY CHRIST 
[Ss PRE EDLY SENT RUS TED a O Wier ORT HE St VAL LON 
OF SOQUESTAND THE GEORY SOR GODS EPORS TENS 
REASON THE RIGHT TO DISD REBUT Ey Df Aik 
SAGRAMENT OF THE EUCHARIST HAS BEEN GLY EN 
TO THRE PRIESTHOOD WIitThOULSANY CIMA DTON'S:. 
REE PAL Eis CANN OU BE GE VED SA Se Om denier, 
MANNER OF DISTRIBUTION [OF THE SACRAMENT] 
WHICH DERIVES FROM POWER FREELY GRANTED TO 
PELE SEARLES TEL OO DEWAN ID sib ES m AUNTS ibs malt E mE TAU SIR 
ARGUMENT OF THE BOHEMIANS THAT IT IS 
NEGESSARY TO SALVATION THAT BOD SPECIES BE 
DISTRIBUTED: 
208. We must still mention a few things on the subject of reform, 
since departure from the forms handed down to us by the fathers has 
160 


[PDF page 213]
Book I, para. 209 
caused disorder in the church because not everyone has exercised his 
power properly. And so we should consider the power of the church — 
a subject about which many writers have written well — and then the 
area of competence of each governing power in the church according 
to its rank so that the true form of each may be determined in this 
way, and abuses arising from excessive power may be removed by 
means that are appropriate and suitable to the times. These are 
profound and broad topics and therefore they cannot easily be sum- 
marized. Hence we must first speak at length on the power that is 
given to the priesthood to distribute the sacraments and preach the 
gospel. Let it suffice now to say that the ministers and those who 
distribute the sacraments should know that they are envoys, messen- 
gers, and represenatatives of Christ with an obligation to do all things 
with discretion for the honor of God and the salvation of the people, 
as is the command of Innocent in D. go [c. 11] Praecepimus. 
20g. Ifa minister acts with discretion and exercises the liberty given 
him for those aforesaid purposes, even if others act differently and the 
procedure for administration [of a sacrament] provided by the church 
is not specified in a definite way, he uses the power given to him 
properly, as St. Cyprian writes to Antonianus,' and as Augustine 
writes after him to Vincentius Rogatista concerning certain bishops 
who did not admit adulterers to penitence while others admitted 
them. These, they write, have not on that account been removed from 
the body of the bishops or broken the unity of the Catholic church 
because of the strictness of that punishment or their obstinacy. If 
others grant forgiveness to adulterers, those who do not are not 
separated from the church. “For the bond of concord joins us and the 
one sacrament of the church continues and each bishop performs his 
duty and conducts himself as one who will justify his actions to his 
Lord.’” And this is the opinion of St. Cyprian in various places. 
Hence for the aforesaid purposes it was always possible for the 
priest to vary the manner of administering the sacraments which was 
strict in ancient times for the sake of discipline and later relaxed. For 
at one time pardon was not given to relapsed heretics nor hope of 
communion even on their deathbeds, see De poenitentia D. 6, [after c. 
4] Hoc autem, then later the priesthood met together and writings were 
brought forward on each side and a salutary modification resulted to 
'PL 3, pp. Sirff. {Pl icompeadue 
161 


[PDF page 214]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
the effect that pardon would be granted at the point of death. Cyprian 
writes at length about this to Antonianus. See also De poenitentia D. 3 
[c. 33] Jn Tantum and many texts in the same place. And Pope 
Innocent [I] writes, ““The earlier custom had it that [the sacrament of] 
penance was granted but communion denied. Penance was granted 
and communion was denied because of frequent persecutions so that 
whoever was admitted to penance might at least be punished this 
much [by the denial of communion] in the hope that this might 
prevent those who had returned from relapsing. Today however, 
since peace has been granted to the church, the earlier stricter 
observance has been made easier so that they are admitted both the 
penance and to communion on their deathbeds.’” 
210. It would be superfluous to discuss all these variations here. We 
know that it was decided at the Council of Sardica — which the whole 
church has accepted, as appears in the acts of the Eighth Council* — 
that those guilty of corruption [in episcopal elections] should not be 
admitted to communion even at the final moment of death, although 
the Council of Nicaea commanded that every sinner should be admit- 
ted to communion on his deathbed.° Similarly the last chapter of the 
Council of Carthage, which Augustine signed, commands that com- 
munion never be given to those who after taking the vow of chastity 
and receiving the habit, return to the world and marry.° 
And from this and other points, we at least can conclude that the 
priesthood is free to distribute the sacraments in this way or not to do 
so — for the aforesaid purposes and according to the time and place 
and the dispositions of their subjects. And from this it follows that just 
as communion is salutary and healthful, so also excommunication is 
medicinal, to promote the obedience to which all the faithful are 
obliged — see especially on this [C.] 11 q. 3 [c. 11] S7 autem and the 
chapter Absit [c. 14]. For we read that St. Peter said to Clement: “For 
it is fitting that the one who is in authority should act the part of a 
doctor.” On which [see] the letter of Clement to James, the brother of 
the Lord.’ 
211. Hence it is clear that the Bohemians are incorrect in thinking 
that communion under both species is required for laymen for, since 
laymen can not receive communion by themselves and since the 
5PL 20, pp. 498ff. *Mansi 16, pp. 172ff. 
> Mansi 3, p. 7 and 2, p. 674. ° Mansi 3, p. 95. 
“Hinschius, p. 31. (A forgery — see Cusanus’ criticisms in Book 1, ch. 2, no. 309.) 
162 


[PDF page 215]
Book IT, para. 212 
power was granted to the priesthood to give and not give it for the 
aforesaid purposes, as the above examples also indicate, the faithful 
would then be obliged to do the impossible! And if they say that the 
priesthood is obliged by the command of Christ to distribute it in this 
way, let them say how the church observed the commands of Christ 
before Pope Innocent when it was customary not to distribute com- 
munion — also at the time of Cyprian and Pope Cornelius when it was 
not given to relapsed heretics and at the time of the Council of 
Sardica when it was denied to the corrupt, and [also] at that time 
when it was not given to adulterers or to those who had violated the 
vow of chastity and at the time of the Council of Elvira — as appears in 
chapter 63 of that Council — when the sacrament was not given even 
on their deathbeds to adulterers who had killed their baby, nor to 
those guilty of a serious crime against a priest or bishop as in chapter 
75 of the same council, nor to those who corrupted little boys as in 
chapter 71, nor to a woman who married a man other than the one 
with whom she had committed fornication, as appears in chapter 72 — 
to none of these was communion given even at the end of their lives.” 
And now that communion has been distributed for a long time under 
one species if it were commanded to distribute it under both species, 
it would not be true that, as Christ promised, the majority of the 
priests and bishops would always have been in the true faith and law 
of Christ as St. Cyprian writes and as I have mentioned above.'? And 
in a certain little work against this error of the Bohemians, I have 
made an extensive collection of authorities from the canon of the 
Bible and the canons of councils and the writings of the doctors, 
proving that the power to distribute the sacrament of the Eucharist 
belongs to the priesthood freely and without restriction. Therefore let 
us conclude this discussion. 
212. Let this suffice, for it is not relevant to the present discussion. 
It is enough to know that the priesthood here assembled has the 
power to decide freely concerning the responsibility entrusted to it of 
distributing the sacraments for the glory of God and the salvation of 
the people, different dispositions and customs notwithstanding. 
SPL 3, pp. 878ff. Mansi 2, p. 16. ' Book u, no. 79. 


[PDF page 216]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
CHAPTER XXVII 
THE GREATEST DISORDER COMES FROM ABUSES ON 
THE PART OF THE HEAD, WHEN SUPERIORS USURP 
THE POWER OF THOSE UNDER THEM. 
213. One should obey one’s superiors within the limits of the power 
of each, — see the Archdeacon’s comments on the chapter [c. 27] Si 
quis praepostera of D. 50 and on [C.] 7 q. 1 [c. 18] Quia frater and [C.] 
11 q. 3 [c. 92] Non Semper and the writings of doctors of theology on 
the text of Matthew: “What they say, do.’’! First we should consider 
the power of the Roman pontiff, because as Gregory says in [C.] 2 q. 
7 [c. 46] Sicit inquit, a reforming council should begin with its head. 
The title attached to the text proves this. Hence if every power 
governed in accordance with the regulations established by the 
universal councils, the best possible reform would necessarily result. 
Thus Pope Leo writes to Constantinus, Audentius, Rusticus etc. “It 
is a just and reasonable cause for rejoicing when we know that the 
things that have been done by the priests of the Lord are in harmony 
with the rules of the canons of the fathers and those established by the 
apostles. For the whole body of the church must increase in a salutary 
way if the members who are in authority show vigor in their authority 
and moderation in their rule.’ 
214. Hence according to Leo IX, as we have said earlier, all the 
members of the one church and of the Mystical Body of Christ have 
their specific functions, the exercise of which cannot be impeded by 
others without disturbance of order, see D. 89 [c. 1] Singula, But a 
disturbance of order is a disturbance of the entire corporate union of 
the church. Because of it disorder and weakness spread to the whole 
body, see [C.] 11 q. 1 [c. 39] Pervenit; D. gg [c. 4] Nullus and the 
canon, Ecce [c. 5]. And the text of Gregory, Singula, says, “It is 
harmful and most criminal for one member to usurp the function of 
another and not to distribute the ministries to individuals. Therefore 
neither a head nor a member has any right whatsoever to usurp the 
power of another member, if that member is to be healthy and 
vigorous and active. If his office is usurped, there will be harmful 
"Matthew 23:3. PI Gan py oud 
164 


[PDF page 217]
Book Il, para. 215 
disturbance to the whole body.”* Therefore if we know what is proper 
for each member according to the rules of the ancients, we will see 
how disorder in the body arises. For it would not be disordered, had 
not an excess or abuse taken place. And because when the head is ill 
the other members suffer, it follows that the salvation of the subjects 
depends on the health of the rulers, see D. 61 [c. 5] Miramur; D. 86 
[c. 1] /nferiorum. Therefore no greater disorder can arise than when 
someone believes that because of his great power anything is permiss- 
ible, and he violates the rights of his subjects. 
SPlose cir: 
GQHAP DE RSX TIT 
NORMALLY IT IS THE POPE’S RESPONSIBILITY TO 
DEGIDE, DIPEIC UII GASES, DO GARE PORT EE 
UNIVERSAL CHURCH, AND TO CONFIRM 
METRO POLTDANS = AGLING TN AGWAY SIMILAR TO 
ANY PATRIARCH IN HIS AREA OF JURISDICTION. 
PE RESWE REP EReDOw HELO PINION: OF [THE COUNCIL 
OF] CHA GhDON CAND E DROPAYEAN ONS OF DHE BiG hr 
GOUNCIES PROM DHESE AND OTHER SOURCES WE 
CONCLUDE THAT THE ORDINARY POWER OF THE 
PORE IS TOCGARRY OUL GHEE SE PUN GIONS, AND EEO 
CALL SYNODS, TO SUMMON METROPOLITANS TO 
ATTEND THEM, AND TO JUDGE CONTROVERSIES 
AMONG THEM. WE DISCUSS HOW THE PRINCES AND 
DAEVEMPEROREUSED) LO PARTICIPATE TONEY SIN DEE 
COUNCTIES*OR DHE UNIVERSALIGHUR GEO INOT EN 
THOSE On LHESeORE ORVTRE PADRTAR CHSr UNLESS 
EVERYONE MAINTAINS THE LAW AND OBSERVES 
RHEVGAN ONS, DHESREAGE) OF) DRE  GhHUR GH Wilhia Bis 
DESDROYED: 
215. Let us see therefore what is the legitimate power of the 
supreme pontiff. There is no doubt that his power to feed his sheep 
and to decide doubtful questions is very great, but it has certain 
specific limits. For although what the pope can do is noted in chapter 
165 


[PDF page 218]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
1 of [Decretals 1 7] of De Translatione Praelati in the text and the gloss, 
and in [Decretals v 31] De Excessibus Praelatorum |c. 8] Sicut unire, and 
in [Decretals 1 30] De Officio legati [c. 4] Quod translationem, and in 
[Decretals 11 8] De Concessione Praebendae |c. 4] Proposuit, and in [C.] 
25 q. 1 [c. 6] Sunt quidem, and in [C.] 1 q. 7 [after c. 5] Nisz rigor in the 
gloss, and in D. 14 [c. 2] Sicut in the ancient gloss and in many other 
glosses, what is within his regular competence is his because he is 
chief of the bishops of the faith, in matters of faith which are in doubt, 
as is said elsewhere above,' as well as in all matters affecting the 
general interest of the whole church, and in serious cases. I find this 
to be the view of his power in the Council of Nicaea, in that of 
Chalcedon, and in the eighth Council of Constantinople. The sixth 
canon of the Council of Nicaea says that he has power over those 
under him on the basis of custom, see D. 66 [D. 63 c. 6] Mos est, 
although I do not find this canon quoted in the same way in the 
{records of] Council of Chalcedon.? The decision of the Council of 
Chalcedon on the claims of the churches of Rome and of Constan- 
tinople speaks of the primacy as follows: “On the basis of the actions 
and texts quoted by each side, we hold that according to the canons 
the most reverend bishop of old Rome indeed possesses the primacy 
and foremost place before all, but the most reverend archbishop of 
the royal city of Constantinople, the new Rome, should enjoy the 
same privileges of primacy and should have the power to ordain 
bishops in the dioceses of Asia, Pontica, and Thrace in the following 
way: After a decree has been issued by the clerics and the property- 
holders and most eminent men of each metropolis, all or the majority 
of the most reverend bishops of the province should elect whomever 
in the metropolitan church they deem worthy. But the one who is 
elected should be referred by all the electors to the most holy Arch- 
bishop of Constantinople and he should be asked whether he wishes 
him to come to be ordained there or if he wishes it to be carried out 
with his permission in the province where he will be bishop. The 
bishop of each city is to be ordained by all or a majority of the 
reverend bishops of the province, and the metropolitan [of the prov- 
ince] has the power [of confirmation] which is described in the rule 
adopted by the fathers, while the most reverend archbishop of Con- 
stantinople does not participate in the ordination. These things have 
"Book 1, no. 95. 
* Mansi 2, p. 670 and 7, pp. 451ff., which also includes the lengthy quotation that follows. 
166 


[PDF page 219]
Book IT, para. 216 
been reviewed by us. But let the holy and universal council deign to 
teach what we have decided. The most reverend bishops said, — ‘This 
is a just conclusion. We all say it, and we all approve, — etc.’” and at 
the end “The whole synod has approved what we have discussed.” 
216. Note that in this decree it is stated that whatever honors the 
pope enjoys as primate, the patriarch of Constantinople also has. But 
the patriarch of Constantinople has only the right to confirm the 
metropolitans, as is evident from the canon, and therefore the Roman 
pontiff also normally only has this power. And what is said in the 
whole of D. 100 agrees with this. Nevertheless in [canon] law the 
confirmation of metropolitans belongs to those under him, see D. 51 
[c. 5] Qui in aliquo and D. 63 [c. 63] Quia igitur in the Gloss, although 
the Roman pontiff is the only one who hands over the pallium,’ as is 
said throughout D. roo and in many other places. And on this see 
decree 17 of the Eighth Universal Council — the last for which we 
have the decrees. The heading of that decree says, On the power of the 
patriarchs and the coming of the metropolitans to them etc... . “The holy 
and universal Council of Nicaea earlier commanded that the ancient 
custom be observed that the bishop of Alexandria should have power 
over all the bishops in Egypt and the provinces under it, saying that 
this was the custom that prevailed in the city of Rome. Therefore this 
holy and great synod decrees that the ancient custom should be 
preserved both in the old and the new Romes and in the sees of 
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem that the rulers in those sees 
should have power over all the metropolitans that are appointed by 
them — whether they receive confirmation of their episcopal rank 
through the laying-on of hands or by the giving of the pallium — to 
bring them together in a synodal meeting whenever there is an urgent 
necessity, and even to coerce and compel them when rumor has 
perhaps accused them of certain misdeeds. But if there are certain 
metropolitans who plead that they are detained without reason by 
secular princes thus preventing them from responding to the call of 
their apostolic superiors, we decree that such an excuse is altogether 
invalid. For since princes often have meetings for their own purposes, 
it is impious that they should prevent the highest church authorities 
from holding synods on church business or prohibit some of them 
3 The pallium is a wool shoulder garment given by the pope to an archbishop. Since the 
ninth century it has been regarded in the Western church as a prerequisite for the 
exercise of authority by an archbishop. 
167 


[PDF page 220]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
from attending their councils — although we have learned that these 
impediments and specious prohibitions have sometimes been 
maneuvers suggested by the metropolitans. But the metropolitans 
have been accustomed to hold synods twice a year, and so they say 
they can not meet with their patriarchal head.” 
217. ‘But this holy and universal synod, while not forbidding the 
councils held by the metropolitans, considers that those that are held 
by a patriarchal see are much more important and useful than the 
councils of the metropolitans. And therefore it ordains that they 
should be held. Each province is administered by a metropolitan but 
often a case involving a whole diocese is decided by the patriarch for 
the common good. And therefore a particular good should be 
subordinated to the common good as our ancestors have advocated, 
although among certain metropolitans ancient custom and apostolic 
tradition seem to have been held in contempt and they do not go to 
the meetings held for the common benefit. The laws of the church 
condemn them and oblige them to obey the call of their patriarch, 
whether this is done in a general summons or by individual sealed 
letter. And we totally reject what is said by certain ignorant men that a 
synod can not be held without the presence of the ruler, since the 
sacred canons have never commanded that the secular princes should 
meet in the councils, but only the bishops. And we do not find that 
they were present at those synods except in the universal councils, 
and it is not right that secular princes should observe some of the 
things that are done by the priests of God. Therefore except in cases 
of very serious illness or pagan invasion, any metropolitan who has 
disregarded his patriarch and disobeyed a summons, whether direc- 
ted to him alone or to many or to all, and who has not come for two 
whole months after receiving notice of the summons calling him to 
come to his patriarch, or if in any way he has tried to hide from, or 
avoid meeting the messengers sent by him, shall be suspended. But if 
he has demonstrated the same obstinacy and disobedience for one 
year, he shall be completely deposed and cease all clerical activity and 
be removed from office and from the honor due a metropolitan. And 
he who does not obey this definition, let him be anathema.’”* 
218. Notice that according to the canon law regulations the pope 
only confirms the metropolitans, hands over the pallium, and calls the 
*Mansi 16, pp. 170ff. 
168 


[PDF page 221]
Book IT, para. 219 
council — and on this, see [C.] 3 q. 6 [c. 9] Dudum. And note the 
closing for it says “On the power of the patriarchs.” Hence although 
another text on the right of convocation speaks otherwise, see [C.] 9 
q. 3 [c. 21] Per principalem, which states that he can summon both 
monks and all clergymen to himself, according to the ancient gloss 
this is not proper because he ought to do this [only] after consulting 
their religious superiors — although, as the [ordinary] gloss says, their 
consent is not required. Hence if as Pope Nicholas decrees in [C.] 9 
q. 3 [c. 8] Conquestus, the canons of the Nicene councils are to be 
observed, it is the intention of the Nicene Council, set down here in 
the text of the Nicene Council quoted and later repeated above, that 
his power consists in confirming metropolitans and convening the 
councils. For if the pope wishes to exercise his power in accordance 
with the canons of Nicaea, then he will give back their rights to the 
metropolitans and permit each church to have the freedom to govern 
its own diocese. 
219. And we have already heard enough above about the inviol- 
ability and permanence of those canons and the invalidity of anything 
contrary to them and we have stated that peace is preserved in the 
church of God when they are observed. Now in order to prove these 
things let us add a passage from the letter of Pope Boniface to Hilary, 
the bishop of Narbonne, “We have heard that Patroclus has ordained 
someone in another province, bypassing the metropolitan contrary to 
the rules of the fathers. And we cannot bear this in patience for we 
must be diligent custodians of the laws of the fathers. The law of the 
Council of Nicaea is known to all — which commands — to quote its 
words: ‘Each metropolitan ought to have jurisdiction over one prov- 
ince and two provinces can not be subject to the same metropolitan.’ ” 
And below, “By our authority we prohibit the presumptuousness of 
those who would unduly extend the limits of their power. And we say 
this so that Your Grace may note that we are observing the precepts of 
the canons through this decree of ours which commands that each 
province should always await the direction of its metropolitan on all 
questions.” And the Council of Nicaea in D. 64 [c. 1] Episcopi says 
that the confirmation of bishops belongs to the metropolitan and the 
same Council says: “As is generally known, if anyone is made bishop 
without the knowledge of the metropolitan, this great synod decides 
>PL 20, pp. 772 and 774. 
169 


[PDF page 222]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
that he ought not to be bishop,” see D. 100 [c. 8] ///ud and on that 
subject D. 65 as a whole. And in the chapter [of D. 65] Non debet [c. 2] 
quoted from the Council of [Pope] Martin it is said that an ordination 
carried out in any other way is invalid. And the Council of Antioch 
says in the next chapter [c. 3] “If it is done in any other way than as we 
have commanded, it is invalid.” Election and ordination are con- 
sidered as equivalents, as will be seen below. 
And this is a command of God the Father and the law of Mother 
Church, see [C.] 3 q. 6 [c. 10] Haec quippe. Thus Pope Leo says to 
Anastasius: “‘According to the canons of the holy fathers established 
by divine inspiration ... we decree that those consecrated before the 
whole world as metropolitan bishops of the individual provinces 
should maintain their ancient rights undiminished as given to them so 
that they may not depart from the preestablished rules by either 
negligence or presumption, etc.” And Leo says the same thing to 
Maximus of Antioch: “Peace and universal tranquillity can not be 
preserved except by maintaining reverence for the canons.””’ 
220. Note that the law decreed that bishops should be ordained by 
decision of metropolitans, see D. 24 [c. 4] Episcopi. And there are 
countless laws to this effect. According to Hincmar a bishop should 
nat visit the pope without consulting his metropolitan, and Zosimus 
writes the same thing to all the bishops in France in the letter begin- 
ning Placuit in which he discusses commendatory letters.* Similarly 
appeals were to be made through the hierarchical ranks without 
bypassing the metropolitan unless he was involved in the case, see 
[C.] 2 q. 7 le. 54] Metropolitanum. As to how the consent of the 
primate used to be secured when the metropolitan performed the 
ordination, see D. 65 [c. 4] De persona. 
®PL 54, p. 672. 
OPincaypetod 
SPL 126, pp. 202ff. and 20, pp. 642ff. 
170 


[PDF page 223]
Book IT, para. 221 
GIERATP DE REXOCIEX 
DHE CANONS OF THE EIGHTH GOUNCIEN OF LEN 
MiISOU ODE DEIN THE DECRETUMS ARE DEE BE Sma 
MODEL FOR REFORM. ACCORDING TO THE EIGHTH 
CANON TOR THAD COUNGIE, METROPOLTITANS ARE 
NOT TO BE CONCERNED WITH WORLDLY 
RES PONS IBIMTILES ORS DOME: SUPE RAGAINS 
EXERCISE RHEUR SPIRITUAL RESPONSIBILITIES. DHE 
GREATEST ABUSES RESULT FROM THE FACT THAT 
PREVA ES ARES OFINVOLVEDIIN SEGULAR 
CONCERNS. 
221. And because the Eighth Universal Council was, as I have said, 
the last one whose canons have been written down, we must give 
proper attention to its legislation. And although its canons are few in 
the Decretum, they are sometimes attributed to Pope Hadrian, as in D. 
63 [c. 1] Nullus and the chapter Adrianus [c. 2] and to the Sixth 
Council, as in [C.] 12 q. 2 [c. 13] Apostolicos. This is why I have taken 
care to note that they are canons of the Eighth Council. In the first 
canon concerning metropolitans, canon 24 commanded that 
metropolitans perform divine offices, litanies, and other sacred func- 
tions pertaining to their duties not through suffragan bishops but 
directly. “As the Holy Scriptures say — ‘Cursed be every man who 
neglects to carry out the work of the Lord.’ Certain metropolitans out 
of negligence and laziness summon bishops subject to them and 
entrust them with the divine offices of their own church and the 
litanies and all sacred ministries which are properly theirs, which they 
[the metropolitans] should carry out joyfully themselves. In this way 
they make those who have merited the rank of bishop into clerics in 
their service. And the metropolitans devote themselves to secular 
concerns and decisions in opposition to the provisions of church law. 
They neglect to offer prayers and supplications for their own offenses 
and for the ignorance of the people. Such conduct is hardly ever 
found among some since it is altogether contrary to the canonical 
precepts. What is worse, to receive their incomes they [the bishops] 
are said to be ordered to perform the aforesaid duties at different 
times in the month which can be demonstrated to be altogether 
ip 


[PDF page 224]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
contrary to the apostolic recommendations. But this demonstrates 
that they should be most strongly condemned, for it is proven that 
those who do these things are possessed by diabolical arrogance and 
pride. But after this definition by the holy universal synod, any 
metropolitan who in a spirit of audacity, pride, and contempt for 
abuses does not try to perform his duties in his own city in the fear of 
God zealously and with a good conscience but acts through suffragan 
bishops, shall be punished by his own patriarch and either corrected 
or deposed.””! 
222. Observe that if involvement in secular concerns and decisions 
is completely contrary to the canonical precepts for a metropolitan, 
how [little] the canonical precepts are observed by anyone from the 
pope who is the highest metropolitan down to the lowest rank of the 
metropolitans, as it were! Does not that text truly describe present 
practice? If therefore there is to be a reform eliminating practices that 
are contrary to the canonical precepts, according to that canon they 
must avoid further involvement in secular concerns and decisions, 
and diligently and readily do what is required by their responsibility to 
care for souls. If the pope does not think that this is said to him, let 
him see what St. Clement wrote to James, the brother of the Lord, as 
to what St. Peter had said to him when he ordained him and gave him 
the powers of binding and loosing and urged him to act like a doctor 
for the salvation of those under him. He added that he should not 
become involved in any worldly occupation, saying, “Christ did not 
wish you to be ordained today as a judge or administrator of secular 
affairs lest preoccupied with the present cares of men you might not 
be able to attend to the word of God.’” On the same point, see D. 96 
[c. 6] Cum ad verum and the canon, Duo quippe [c. 10]. Observe that it 
can not be denied that the pope or any other pastor is appointed to 
give the word and example, as Agatho describes it well in the first 
action of the Sixth Council, where he says, “Woe to me if I am 
negligent, etc.’’ 
223. Who, I ask, can adequately fulfill this spiritual responsibility? If 
it is very difficult to satisfy the normal requirements of spiritual care, 
should it not be conceded that concern for temporals is necessarily a 
'Mansi 16, p. 176. 
*Hinschius, pp. 31-32. (Nicholas argues correctly in Book m1, Ch. 2, no. 309, that this 
letter is not authentic.) 
3 Mansi 11, p. 242. 
172 


[PDF page 225]
Book If, para. 224 
serious obstacle to the pastors who govern the church? For if he is 
intent on many mutually incompatible concerns, how can a church 
ruler perform any one of them properly since one who tries to do two 
things completes neither? And circumlocution is not necessary. We 
see that on account of the mixing of responsibilities, temporal con- 
cerns have overcome and nearly subdued the spiritual. If temporal 
resources are so necessary to spiritual activities that they can not exist 
for a long time without them, it is not therefore necessary for the care 
of temporals to be placed on the shoulders of those concerned with 
spirituals, lest one like the pope who as the spiritual leader of the 
others is supposed to show the way to heaven, should fall by the 
wayside more quickly than the others because of the heavy burden of 
temporal concerns. 
224. This was not the way the church was governed after Constan- 
tine. In the records of the Eighth Universal Council from which the 
preceding canon was taken held 400 years after Constantine and in 
the acts of the Sixth Council held at the time of [Pope] Agatho it does 
not appear that the Roman pontiff was so involved in temporal con- 
cerns. Although we find that Sicily, Calabria, Campania etc. were 
parts of the patrimony of St. Peter, there were patricians, and other 
rulers responsible for military affairs. On this, see D. 63 [c. 23] Jn 
synodo and D. 96 [c. 1] Bene inquit and other places discussed below.* 
Now that with the help of God and in accordance with the canon 
quoted above, a solution has thus been found by this holy council for 
the problem of temporal involvement, everything else will follow in a 
salutary fashion because the formerly overburdened spiritual ruler 
will be able to arise, and grow strong and vigorous. 
To see how much the ancients were concerned to prohibit the 
mixing of the spiritual and temporal concerns among the clergy, see 
St. Cyprian’s letter to the clergy and people concerning Victor, who 
named the priest Faustinus as a guardian etc.,° and D. 88 [c. 4] 
Perlatum and the entire Distinction. They carried out temporal affairs 
through representatives and managers, as in D. 89 [c. 2] Volumus and 
in the chapter [c. 4] Quia in quibusdam, and in [Decretals 1 31] De 
Officio Ordinarii, [c. 4] Cum vos and in [C.] 16 q. 7 [c. 22] Jn nona 
actione. And on this we should note the opinion of our fellow German, 
Hugh of St. Victor, who is most learned in every branch of know- 
*Book «1, ch. 39. °PL 4, pp. 400ff. 


[PDF page 226]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
ledge, when he says in De Sacramentis, “Although the church receives 
the fruit of earthly possessions for its use, churchmen may not 
exercise the power of dispensing justice or carrying out secular judg- 
ments. Nevertheless the church can have lay persons as its ministers 
to carry out the laws and judgments pertaining to earthly power and 
the requirements of earthly law. However let those who exercise this 
power recognize that they have it by grant of an earthly prince.’”® 
According to this, the patricians and the rulers of the patrimony of the 
church are appointed by the prince with the consent of the church. 
°PL 176, p. 420. Hugh of St. Victor was born in Saxony. 
CHAPTER XXX 
AJGREATLT ABUSE IS DTHESUSEOPOVISIT Ss FOR 
CORRE GTIONAL AND PASTORAL PURPOSES AS 
SOURCES OF PROFID. ALGANONIOR DHE EIGHTH 
COUN GIESISTOU. OE Desi ADDING DEL AChe ia) Sa4. 
SA GRIEEGE TO LAY BURDENS ON THE CHURGHES IN 
ONE’S JURISDICTION UNDER THE PRETEXT OF 
VISITING THEM. THE AVARIGE OF CHURGH 
SUPERIORS AND ESPECIALLY OF THE ROMAN CURIA 
MUST BE ENDED, AND THE NEEDS OF THE CHURCH 
SHOULD BE PROVIDED FOR BY A REGULAR GENERAL 
CONTRIBUTION. 
225. Another abuse which must be eliminated henceforth is for 
superiors to take advantage of their high position to burden their 
subordinates excessively. The Eighth Universal Council in chapter 19 
adopted the following canon against archbishops who lay burdens on 
their suffragans on the pretext of visiting them: ‘““The great Apostle 
Paul decried avarice, comparing it to idolatry, and called on all who 
called themselves Christians to abstain from all filthy lucre. Still 
worse is it for those who are members of the priesthood to burden 
fellow-bishops and suffragans in any way. Therefore this holy and 
universal synod decrees that no archbishop or metropolitan may leave 
his own church and on the pretext of a [canonical] visitation go to 
174 


[PDF page 227]
Book IT, para. 226 
other churches and abuse his power over his subordinates and con- 
sume income which is reserved for the administration of the church 
and the feeding of the poor, and in this avaricious way burden the 
consciences of their brothers and fellow-ministers. An exception can 
be made for the hospitality which may perhaps be required for a 
necessary trip. But even in this case let him accept with dignity in 
reverence and fear of God only what can be prepared quickly and 
easily and continue on his proposed journey speedily, without seeking 
or demanding anything of what belongs to that church or suffragan 
bishop. For if the sacred canons decree that each bishop should make 
sparing use of the goods of his own church and in no way either spend 
his own resources or consume church income unreasonably, of what 
impiety do you not think he will be judged guilty who does not fear to 
burden and solicit the churches entrusted to other bishops and thus 
incur the crime of sacrilege? Therefore whoever after this definition 
of ours attempts anything like this, shall be punished by his patriarch 
at the time in proportion to the degree of his injustice and avarice, and 
let him be deposed and excommunicated as sacrilegious and a quasi- 
idolater according to the description of the great Apostle.” 
226. Observe that those who use some pretext to burden their 
subordinate churches are guilty of sacrilege. This is why this world 
cries out at the acquisitiveness of the Roman curia. If simony is in a 
way a kind of heresy, if it is a sacrilege and according to the great 
Apostle idolatry to burden subordinate churches, a reform is necess- 
ary which will take away all these profits — in particular since the 
whole church is scandalized by the avarice of its rulers, and by that of 
the Roman curia more than of the other churches. Therefore this 
abuse in particular must be abolished by this sacred reform council 
because it is impious, injurious to souls, and a scandal to the whole 
church. Let everything done at the Roman curia and in the other 
metropolitanates be without payment. If a superior lacks money, let a 
charitable contribution be made without objection when his extortion 
ceases. If the government of the universal church needs it for the 
expenses of its legates and of participants in the permanent council 
and others serving the public welfare, there is no doubt that enough 
will be provided without difficulty from a collection. If the blind 
avarice and pompous dissoluteness of the members of the curia 
'Mansi 16, pp. 172ff. 
175 


[PDF page 228]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
ceases, the good God will undoubtedly see to it that the church can 
provide for itself in all proper circumstances, especially when matters 
which are both Christ’s concern and ours are acted upon in a tranquil 
spirit. Perhaps a permanent rule can not be made now as to how much 
would suffice for a required annual contribution, for we should always 
provide for the needs that occur. Hence for the present let this holy 
synod decree an annual collection which is to continue until the next 
universal council. But if a difficult situation develops for the Roman 
pontiff which requires something more to be done, let him convene 
the universal council to provide for it. 
CHAPTER XXXII 
AS REMEDY FOR EPISCOPAL ABUSES Is" PROVIDED IN 
THE TWEEN RY “SIXTH GANNON OP DHE EIGHTH 
GCOUNCGID WHIGH Ss TADRES THAT THOSE SUBIJEGh LO 
A BISHOP WHO ARE WRONGED BY HIM MAY CALL 
HIM TOPPRVAL ARP PALS OUGHT LOPBE NAD TE 
THROUGH THE RANKS OF THE HIERARCHY AS FAR 
WS) PEE PAT REAR GH: 
227. Subordinates are also often unjustly oppressed by a bishop 
who is suspected of being prejudiced in favor of an adversary or 
hostile to them. The Eighth Synod decreed a remedy against this in 
its 26th canon which says: “It has pleased this holy synod that any 
priest or deacon who has been removed by his own bishop for some 
crime and says he has suffered an injustice and does not agree with 
the decision of his bishop, because he suspects that either hostility to 
him or favoritism to certain others has made him act against him in 
this way, shall have the power to appeal to the metropolitan of that 
province and to denounce his removal or any injury which he thinks 
unjust. And the metropolitan shall receive him freely in this way and 
call the bishop who removed or in any way wronged the cleric and 
together with other bishops he shall make an examination of the 
matter himself in order to confirm the removal of the clergyman as 
above suspicion or to annul it by decision of a fuller and larger synod. 
Likewise we decree that bishops may also appeal to their patriarchal 
176 


[PDF page 229]
Book Il, para. 227 
superiors if they believe that they have received similar treatment 
from their metropolitans and let the case when it is appealed to the 
patriarch and the metropolitans under him receive a just decision 
which is above suspicion. In addition let no metropolitan or bishop be 
judged by the neighboring metropolitans or the bishops of his own 
province, even if it is publicly known that certain crimes have taken 
place, but only by his patriarch. We decree that the opinion and 
judgment of the patriarch is reasonable, just, and above suspicion 
because he associates a number of most honorable advisers with 
himself and therefore what is decided by him is considered 
thoroughly valid and definitive. If anyone does not agree with what we 
have decreed, let him be excommunicated.” 
This canon provides a clear remedy for anyone who feels that he 
has been wronged. He should appeal through the hierarchy to the 
patriarch over him whose judgment is final because of the fact that he 
associates a number of most honorable advisers with him in the 
decision. 
'Mansi 16, pp. 177ff. 
177 


[PDF page 230]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
CHAPTER XXxXXxII 
MONKS APPOINTED AS BISHOPS SHOULD KEEP 
THEIR HABITS AND MONASTIC OBSERVANCE IN 
ACCORDANCE WITH CHAPTER 27 [OF THE EIGHTH 
COUNCIL]. PRELATES SHOULD BE CHOSEN BY 
ELECTION. THESE ELECTIONS SHOULD BE CARRIED 
OUT FREELY AND WITHOUT PRESSURE; THOSE 
MADE BISHOPS FOR POLITICAL REASONS BY THE 
ORDER OF PRINCES SHOULD BE DEPOSED; AND 
ONLY THOSE SUITABLE FOR HIGH POSITION WHO 
HAVE COME UP THROUGH THE HIERARCHY AND 
WHO ARE TONSURED OUT OF LOVE OF GOD, NOT 
DESIRE FOR OFFICE, SHOULD BE PROMOTED TO 
PRELACIES. [A CANDIDATE] SHOULD FIRST SPEND 
FOUR YEARS AS A PRIEST AND PROMOTIONS 
SHOULD BE MADE FROM THE RANKS OF THE SAME 
CHURCH IF WORTHY CANDIDATES ARE FOUND. 
THOSE WHO HAVE HELD SECULAR 
RESPONSIBILITIES SHOULD NOT BE APPOINTED, 
AND A BISHOP SHOULD NOT BE APPOINTED 
AGAINST THE WILL OF HIS SUBJECTS. MANY GOOD 
REASONS ARE GIVEN TO PROVE THAT ELECTIONS 
ARE BASED ON DIVINE AND HUMAN LAW. 
228. The synod also decreed in its 27th chapter that the 
metropolitan or anyone else for whom it was appropriate should only 
use the pallium at certain times and that those promoted from the 
monastic life to the rank of bishop would be obliged to keep the 
monastic observance and habit.’ This last particular is very appropri- 
ate for our time because we see a number of dissolute men have been 
made bishops who formerly were monks but who do not maintain the 
habit or their former observance. The same [Eighth] Council in its 
22nd chapter decreed that prelates should be chosen by election 
saying, “This holy and universal synod in accord with previous 
councils defines and decrees that promotion and consecration as 
"Mansi 16, p. 178. 
178 


[PDF page 231]
Book IT, para. 230 
bishop should be carried out by election and decision of the college of 
bishops. It also promulgates a law that no lay prince or potentate may 
involve himself in the election or promotion of a patriarch or of a 
metropolitan or any bishop, lest this cause inordinate confusion and 
contention, especially since it is not fitting that any secular power or 
layman should have power in such matters. Rather he should remain 
silent and wait until the regular election of the future officer is con- 
cluded by the church assembly. But if a layman is invited by the 
church to assist and to cooperate, he may obey with reverence if he 
perhaps wishes to do so.” And further on: “But any secular prince or 
potentate or layman of another rank who tries to do anything to 
prevent the commonly agreed canonical election of a member of the 
church hierarchy will be anathema until he obeys and consents to 
what the church has shown that it wishes concerning the election and 
ordination of its rulers.”” This decree, although with the wrong title, 
is contained in D. 63 [c. 1] Nullus and the chapter [c. 2] Adrianus. 
229. The 12th chapter also legislates in like manner: “Since the 
canons of the apostles and the synods absolutely forbid episcopal 
promotions and consecrations based on the power or orders of 
princes, we unanimously decree and decide that if any bishop receives 
consecration to his office in this way through the guile or tyrannous 
influence of a prince, he shall be deposed immediately as one who 
desired and consented to possess a gift of God not by the will of God 
and a proper ecclesiastical decision, but from the will of the flesh and 
by and through men.’? We all know how necessary today is this 
provision, which is expressed in many earlier laws and reiterated in 
the Eighth Council. 
230. ‘Then so that qualified persons could be advanced in order, the 
fifth chapter decreed as follows: “So that the canons may always be 
observed in the church through Christ, we renew and confirm the 
terms and sanctions that were issued by the holy apostles and our holy 
fathers and set down as the law of the church.” And below, ““There- 
fore in accordance with the preceding canons we decree that no one 
who has renounced senatorial rank or secular responsibilities and 
become a tonsured cleric or monk in the intention or hope of being 
made a bishop or patriarch can rise to such a rank in this way, even if 
it is proven that he has spent considerable time in the various orders 
* Mansi 16, pp. 174ff. +Mansi 16, p. 167. 
179 


[PDF page 232]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
of the divine priesthood. This kind of person has received tonsure not 
out of fear and love of God or the desire to adopt a life of virtue but 
because of love of glory and power. We command this still more 
strongly, if it is done under pressure from the imperial court. But if in 
a case in which there is no suspicion of the aforesaid concupiscence 
and desire but only a humility which is like that of Jesus Christ, 
someone renounces the world to become a cleric or monk and after 
going through every ecclesiastical rank for the specified time is found 
to be blameless and proven, spending a year as a reader, two years as a 
subdeacon, three years as a deacon, and four years as a priest, it has 
well pleased the holy and universal synod that he should be elected 
and admitted [as a bishop]. But in the case of those who after faith- 
fully remaining in the rank of clerics or monks have been judged as 
also worthy of the dignity and honor of the episcopacy, we shorten the 
times mentioned above according as their superiors at the time 
decide. But if anyone advances to the aforesaid divine supreme honor 
in violation of this decision of ours, he will be condemned and 
expelled from all sacerdotal positions because he was promoted in 
violation of the sacred canons.’’* This is a reform canon which is very 
necessary at this time. 
231. And subsequently in canon 13, the council wished to provide 
that if worthy candidates are found they should be promoted in their 
own churches. Hence it decreed as follows: “Because Divine Scrip- 
ture says at one point — “The laborer is worthy of his hire,’ we also 
decree and proclaim that the clerics of our great church who have 
remained in minor orders should rise to major orders, and if they 
appear worthy they should merit greater honors when any of those 
who presently exercise these offices have been promoted to more 
important duties or have died. But outsiders should not receive 
offices and honors which should go to those who have worked [there] 
for a long time, since this would deprive the clergy of that church of 
advancement. And those who have taken care of the residences or 
lands of princes shall have no power to be appointed to the clergy of 
this great church. For no one who works for God is involved in 
secular affairs. But if anyone is promoted to any office in this great 
church in violation of the decree which we have now put forward, let 
him be removed from every ecclesiastical position as one who has 
*Mansi 16, pp. r62ff. 
180 


[PDF page 233]
Book IT, para. 233 
contravened the great synod.”” Observe that after many other ancient 
laws this reform decree was repeated twice by the Eighth Universal 
Council and note well that it says: “Let him be removed as one who 
has contravened the great synod.” 
232. From this it is evident that if a bishop is assigned to unwilling 
subjects he can be rejected, since this is contrary to the great synod 
which provided that appointments should be carried out by way of 
election. And the text of D. 61 [c. 13] Nullis invitis provides that a 
bishop is not to be appointed against the will of those over whom he is 
to rule. The chapter just referred to is explained further there by 
[Pope] Celestine who says that the priests have the power to refuse a 
bishop if they see that his appointment would be in violation of the 
decree. And the chapter [c. 16] Oditum of the same Distinction says 
that they should not be afraid to refuse those whom they consider to 
have been forced upon them against their wills. And D. 63 [c. 36] Sz 
forte speaks on the same point where the text says that in cases where 
there is disagreement between two people elected [to the same office] 
the one who is requested by the diocese is to be appointed by the 
metropolitan. And the reason that no one is to be appointed over 
unwilling subjects is that a hostile populace would despise a bishop 
whom they did not wish to have. And C. 31 q. 2 [c. 3] De neptis is 
useful on this for if there is a single spiritual body composed of the 
bishop and his people, then consent seems to be necessary, as is said 
there concerning marriage according to the flesh. For there is no 
doubt that there is a marriage between the bishop and his church, see 
C. 3 q. 2 [c. 4] Audivimus and similar passages. And therefore the text 
C. 1 q. 1 [c. 113] Ordinationes says that “Ordinations not made with 
the common consent of the clergy and people according to canonical 
regulations and by those who have the right to perform consecrations 
we judge to be invalid because those who are ordained in this way do 
not enter by the gate which is Christ but, as Truth itself [Scripture] 
bears witness, they are thieves and robbers.’”° 
233. And the reason for this is that consent is essential to a mar- 
riage, as is stated above. For a diversity of ranks between rulers and 
subjects has been commanded for the good of the commonwealth so 
that when the lower ranks show reverence for their superiors and 
superiors show love for their subordinates, a true concordance may be 
° Mansi 16, p. 167. The scriptural quotation is Luke 10:7. 
John 10:7-10. 
181 


[PDF page 234]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
created out of diversity, and proper administration of office may 
result, as is said in D. 89 [c. 7] Ad hoc and D. 45 [c. 4] Licet. Thus the 
church exists in concord, and it is not right to establish someone as a 
ruler over subjects who are opposed to him, as D. 83 Esto says so well. 
Anyone who is in authority should be established with the tacit or 
explicit agreement of all those over whom he exercises authority. If 
anyone has dared to do otherwise, there is no doubt that he is without 
power because his action is invalid, as is said in D. 66 [c. 1] Archi- 
episcopus which is a text of Pope Anicetus who says elsewhere, “One 
who is in authority over all should be elected by all.” It is clear that the 
text Archiepiscopus which speaks of ordination, should be understood 
as also discussing election, both in the original and in the Panormia 
collection of Ivo [of Chartres] which says, “The one who is seen to be 
over all should be elected and ordained by all.”’ The word, “should,” 
is a word of necessity, see D. 50 [c. 28] Domino sancto, that is, it can 
not be otherwise, see C. 3 a. 6 [c. 9g] Dudum which is to be noted in 
favor of the above, along with C. 8 q. 1 [c. 3, 4] Episcopo. The canons 
[c. 19] Metropolitano and [c. 3] Valentinianus of D. 63 also prove the 
same point very well. 
For ordination is often the same thing as election, see D. 61 [c. 2] 
Sacerdotibus. It is a marriage constituted by consent of electors and 
elected, as is noted in the chapter [c. 21] Cum inter canonicos of [Liber 
Sextus 1 6] De electione and D. 63 [c. 10] Quanto in the gloss. But 
election is equivalent to consent as the text in the chapter [c. 13] 
Episcopos of D. 63 says. For according to Innocent the marriage 
between the electors and the one who is elected, — see C. 7 q. 1 [c. 39] 
Sicut and [Decretals 1 7| De Translatione chapter 1 etc., — is contracted 
on behalf of the church by the electors with the one elected. See 
chapter 1 [2] of De Translatione, and the chapter [c. 35] Obeuntibus of 
D. 63. And because every effort for reform requires the establishment 
of good rulers, authorities, and governors, anyone can easily under- 
stand how perilous it is for the subjects, when the one who ought to be 
living law on earth is not virtuous. Hence in order to establish 
ecclesiastical authorities without imposing them on unwilling sub- 
jects, the divine law commands that an election should take place. 
234. Let us content ourselves with a few quotations: St. Cyprian 
writes along these lines in his letter concerning Martialis and 
TTL, ait (a. mae 
182 


[PDF page 235]
Book Il, para. 235 
Basilides, when he says that “the people have the power to elect 
worthy priests and to refuse unworthy ones.” “And it is by divine 
authority,” he says, “that the priest is chosen in the presence of all the 
people before the eyes of all and that he is approved as worthy and 
suitable as a result of public judgment and testimony, as the Lord 
commanded Moses in [the Book of] Numbers; ‘Take Aaron, thy 
brother, and Eleazar, his son, and place them on the mountain before 
the whole congregation and take Aaron’s stole from him and put it on 
Eleazar, his son, and Aaron shall die there.’ God commands that a 
priest be appointed before the whole synagogue — that is, he shows us 
that sacerdotal authorities ought to be appointed with the knowledge 
of the people and in their presence, so that with the people present 
the crimes of evil men may be revealed and the merits of the virtuous 
proclaimed and the ordination may be just and legitimate because it 
results from the participation and the decision of all. And this pro- 
cedure was followed later, according to the divine teachings contained 
in the Acts of the Apostles. When Peter spoke to the people of the 
need to ordain someone in place of Judas the Acts say ‘Peter arose in 
the midst of the disciples, and there was a multitude gathered.’ We 
note that the apostles did this not only for the ordination of bishops 
and priests, but also for the rank of deacons, and something is written 
on this as well in the Acts of the Apostles. ‘The Twelve called 
together,’ it says, ‘the whole multitude of the disciples. And an 
election was carried out with care by the whole people gathered 
together to prevent anyone unworthy from entering the ministry of the 
altar and the rank of priest.”* 
And the glossators when they comment on that text of Acts, chapter 
6, say that the twelve sought to have the consent of the multitude of all 
the faithful who were called disciples so as to set an example as to the 
procedure to be observed in ordinations; the people ought to elect and 
the bishop to ordain. Jerome speaks on the same subject and [what he 
says] is contained in [C.] 8 q. 1 [c. 15] Licet and in the chapter [c. 16], 
Si ergo, on this topic. Also in D. 21 [c. 2] /n novo Pope Anacletus says 
that Peter was made head by the will of the apostles and that the 
apostles elected the 72 disciples. 
235. We read in the Epistie of Clement that Peter sent bishops to 
Gaul and other places and also commanded Clement to send them to 
5Letter to Felix — PL 3, pp. ro6rff. 
183 


[PDF page 236]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
the places to which he had not sent them,’ and thus all patriarchs, 
archbishops, and bishops have gone out from the Apostolic See. This 
is the way I understand the text of D. 22 c. 1, which quotes Pope 
Nicholas who lived nearly 800 years after Christ — although it is 
evident that bishops were not sent out to all parts of the world from 
Rome, for there were already many bishops in the world before Peter 
arrived in Rome, as is demonstrated by their presence in Antioch and 
Jerusalem. Also in Clement’s epistle, he writes to James in Jerusalem 
to send [missionaries] to the Orient. Yet this still does not prove that 
the pope alone established the patriarchs and primates from the 
beginning etc., as certain of his adulators say, for the whole church or 
the apostles who represented the whole church more adequately than 
did Peter alone, established the primates — cf. D. gg [c. 2] Nulli, 
which says, “The Apostles and their successors” etc. Nor does it 
prove that appointments were sometimes made to churches without 
an election for there were no churches at that time but they were sent 
to establish churches and therefore an election could not take place 
because at that time there was no church to carry out an election. 
236. Hence those sent out in this way acting as representatives of 
Christ, the second Adam, built the Eve whom they had espoused out 
of the rib which is the Divine Word. And then to the Eve [church] so 
generated was given only a spouse whom she desired. So today there 
is no doubt that the pope can send preachers to infidel areas in the 
same way that Peter and Clement did, as the text Nu/li quoted above 
proves. And this is the way Hostiensis understands it in his Summa 
[Aurea] commenting on [Decretals 1 30] De officio legati where, when he 
speaks of the matters reserved to the Apostolic See, he says that the 
establishment of cathedral sees belongs to him [the pope]. And this is 
why it is said that all offices originate from the Roman church, see D. 
DD |e, 1] 
237. Note therefore that elections exist by divine law — particularly 
since an unwanted person should not be given to the people and 
consequently it is against all reason to appoint one who is not desired. 
Hence Pope Leo in D. 62 says “There is no reason for there to be 
bishops who have not been elected by the clergy nor desired by the 
people nor consecrated by their fellow bishops with the approval of 
the metropolitan.” Observe that three things are required for a 
’ Hinschius, p. 39 (apocryphal). 
184 


[PDF page 237]
Book IT, para. 238 
presiding officer in the church to be properly constituted; election by 
the clergy, the consent of the people, and the approval of the 
metropolitan. And on this there are an infinite number of legal pro- 
visions, as I will indicate. If therefore the church is to be reformed it is 
necessary that the divine and natural law and the regulations of the 
canons on the matter of elections be reaffirmed and more fully 
observed. Hence Pope Siricius writes to the faithful of various prov- 
inces on the qualifications of those to be ordained and to be elected: 
“We may not be silent about complaints that come to us, most 
beloved brothers, since we fear divine judgment and know that 
everyone will be rewarded after this life as he has acted. Necessity 
commands us to speak, as the prophet says, ‘Raise up your voice on 
the trumpet,’ and if I, to whom the care for all the churches is 
entrusted conceal my voice, I shall hear the Lord say, ‘You reject the 
commands of God so that you may keep your traditions.’ For what is it 
but to reject the commands of God when we delight in creating 
novelties on the basis of private judgment and human counsel. And so 
it has been brought to the knowledge of the Apostolic See that some 
have presumed to go against the ecclesiastical canons and the com- 
mands of our ancestors that the canons were not to be violated even in 
the slightest respect, and that a number of new particular usages are 
being introduced that are built on sand with no foundation. As the 
Lord says, ‘Do not exceed the boundaries which your fathers set.’ 
The Holy Apostle, the preacher of the New and Old Testaments and 
the spokesman of Christ, also warns: ‘Stand firm,’ he says, ‘and hold 
to your traditions which you have learned, whether by word or by 
letter.’”’ And below, ‘““On which, dearest ones, letters of this kind 
have gone earlier to you in your sincerity, with the full consent of the 
brethren and fellow priests, so that the dispositions of the ecclesiasti- 
cal canons which were stated by the Nicene Council and confirmed 
by our signature might justifiably remain as a strong foundation.”!” 
238. Observe that it is against the commands of God to reject the 
canons. Hence although the Roman pontiff can sometimes relax 
inviolable canonical precepts when they are inapplicable, by reason of 
the necessity and utility of the church, as Innocent and Gelasius say in 
[C.] 1 q. 7 [c. 23] Ets? and the canon [c. 7] Quod pro remedio, yet | do 
not think that the pope can take away all the rights of election alto- 
'OPL, 13, pp. 1164ff. 
185 


[PDF page 238]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
gether and reserve ecclesiastical appointments for his own disposal, 
since election comes from the divine and human law and is a com- 
mand of God which the pope is obliged to obey because he “may not 
exceed the boundaries set by the fathers.” The provisions of D. 14 [c. 
2] Sicut and [C.] 1 q. 7 [after c. 5] Nisi rigor and [C.] 25 q. 1 [c. 6] Sunt 
quoniam mean that he can not totally abolish laws from which he can 
grant dispensations for the reasons touched on above. 
239. And because the Roman pontiffs have issued decrees reserving 
episcopal appointments with the tacit consent of the whole Roman 
church and the bishops appointed by them have not been repudiated 
and refused — although in my judgment they could have been refused 
— silence has become consent, which is sufficient basis for the 
legitimate title of those who have been appointed. Silence is taken for 
consent, as stated in the rule, Qui tacet — in this case, lack of opposi- 
tion, as the ancient gloss on the canon [c. 12] Nosse of D. 63 notes 
when it says, “In a public matter whoever does not indicate his 
opposition when he can is understood to consent. And the [diocesan] 
chapter in electing its pastor is understood to be contracting the 
marriage rites of the church. Hence since the church does not protest 
it is understood to consent, just as when a father contracts a marriage 
for his daughter, if she is silent she is understood to consent.” And 
the Archdeacon says the same thing on D. 25 [D. 24] [c. 6] Episcopus 
sine. So on our point, if the pope takes the place of a father and 
provides a spouse and the church is silent and accepts him, its consent 
is understood. This is what Laurentius says on the canon [c. 6] 
Episcopus of D. 24. When the text says that the bishop may not ordain 
clerics without a council of his clergy so that he may secure the 
support and witness of the citizens, Laurentius says, ‘““Support, that is, 
consent, which he is said to have from the fact that they know and do 
not oppose, following the Digest [xx1v 3] Soluto matrimonio law 2, para. 
Voluntatem.”'' And the text [c. 29] Cum Adrianus of D. 63 along with 
the gloss on the words ad salutandum proves this when it argues that 
they consented to an election in that they were present and saluted 
him and did not object, because whoever salutes another seems to 
consent to him, see C. 24 q. 1 [c. 24] Omnis etc. 
240. But now because of various abuses this has been carried to 
excess and opposition has arisen. Therefore I do not think that the 
''Laurentius Hispanus, quoted by the Archdeacon, Guido de Baysio (see Kallen, DCC, 
p. 283). 
186 


[PDF page 239]
Book II, para. 241 
pope can reserve elective benefices any longer unless he is expressly 
allowed to do so by this holy council, in view of the opposition which 
has arisen. For the pope should not appoint a bishop over those who 
are opposed to him, as the text [c. 2] /n novo of D. 21 proves when it 
says that Peter was appointed by the will of the apostles and the gloss 
argues from this text that the pope should not appoint a bishop unless 
those over whom he is placed agree, see D. 22 [c. 2] Sacrosancta at the 
verse [5] inter beatos; [C.] 8 q. 1 [c. 15] Licet and the canons [c. 16] Si 
ergo and [c. 18] Audacter which are referred to above. 
And the Archdeacon following John of God'* commenting on the 
canon Jn novo [of D. 21 c. 2] says that Peter “was chosen for the 
primacy by Christ before the resurrection but he postponed his con- 
firmation until after the resurrection, so that the disciples over whom 
he would rule might give their assent as a model for future elections, 
since no one should be appointed over those who do not wish him, D. 
61 [c. 13] Nullus.” Hence [an election] is void unless there is consent; 
see the canon [c. 35] Obeuntibus of D. 63 where the text says that an 
election which is carried out without their consent and support is 
void, and D. 66 [c. 1] Archiepiscopus proves the same point well. On 
this subject, the gloss on the word, conniventia, in the canon, Obeun- 
tibus concludes from the text that if anything is to be done with the 
consent of others, it is invalidated by their lack of consent. See [also] 
D. 15 [c. 5] Qui in aliquo; [C.] 31 q. 2 [c. 1] Si verum; D. 62 [c. 1] 
Nulla ratio; (C.| 1 q. 1 [c. 113] Ordinationes; [C.] 10 q. 2 [c. 1] Casellas; 
[C. 12] q. 2 [c. 37] Akenationes and [c. 52] Sine; [C.] 15 q. 7 [c. 6] 
Episcopus nullius; [C.] 23 q. 5 [c. 4] Quod Deo and the canon [c. 11] 
Manifestum, and [C.] 20 q. 2 [c. 2] Puella ete. 
241. And an additional strong reason that consent is necessary 
could be given. It is evident that knowledge of the law is required of 
priests, see 2 Malachy, and also that the people are not excused by 
reason of false teaching which has been spread by ignorant or mali- 
cious priests. Hence if the consent of the people were not involved in 
the establishment of their superiors, it would be unjust to punish 
them for the ignorance or malice of their priest in accordance with the 
above principle, since their consent never was given to his rule. For in 
that case nothing can be blamed on that people. Therefore the public 
good requires that rulers be established by the election and consent of 
the people. 
'2 Joannis de Fantutiis (see Kallen, DCC, p. 284). 
187 


[PDF page 240]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
CCUBUAUO TID OO 
FOR REFORM IT IS NECESSARY THAT EACH ONE 
GARRY OUD THE OBLIGATIONS OFVHIs OBRFIGE: 
OTHER NECESSARY CHANGES ARE ENUMERATED IF 
AN ORDERLY REFORM IS TO BE INTRODUCED INTO 
THE CHURCH AND THE CLERGY. 
242. If elections are carried out exactly as described in various 
places above, and the bishops who are legally obliged to do so, appoint 
good curates, as in [C.] 10 q. 1 [c. 4] Regenda and the chapters [c. 3] 
Decretum and [c. 5] Quicumque; [C.] 16 q. 7 [c. 19] Sicut Domini and 
the chapter [c. 10] Ommes basilicae, and they visit their churches 
without becoming a burden to them, as indicated throughout [C.] 10 
q. 3, and they make use of the goods of the church as faithful 
caretakers in accord with the canonical regulations; and if therefore 
there is harmony in divine worship throughout the whole province, as 
the text of the Council of Toledo says in D. 12 [c. 13] De iis and the 
following chapters, and ordinations are made to office on the basis of 
intelligence and devotion rather than of vocal ability or the wearisome 
repetition of psalms, as stated in [Decretum] De Consecratione D. 4 [D. 
5] [c. 24] Non mediocriter, — for we should sing to God not with our 
voices but with our hearts, and theatrical modes should not be heard 
in the church, as Jerome says in D. g2 [c. 1] Cantantes — if all these 
conditions are realized, a sweet concordance which is neither heavy 
nor wearisome will prevail in the temple of God. Therefore let the 
council command that each one must carry out the requirements of 
his office, his vows, his religious duty, and rank. And this command is 
to be scrupulously obeyed, if we wish to promote the salvation of all. 
In addition let it command that in the absence of a legal decision 
superiors who are suspected of any criminal acts are to be freely 
obeyed — as decreed in the tenth chapter of the [Eighth] Universal 
Council.’ As that text also says, let this command be included in the 
divine services with the penalty for violation being deposition for the 
clergy and excommunication for monks and laymen. 
243. And in addition for the preservation of strict moral standards 
'Mansi 16, p. 166. 
188 


[PDF page 241]
Book Il, para. 245a 
in the various church offices, and especially among the bishops, they 
are not to be subordinated to military authorities, as appears in the 
fourteenth chapter of the same council which says: “We have decreed 
that those who by divine grace are called to the office of bishop, since 
they are the image and figurative representation, as it were, of the 
celestial hierarchies of the angels, should be considered by all princes 
and their subjects as worthy of all honor according to their full hier- 
archical grade and function ...” Then let the provision of that holy 
Eighth Council concerning the transfer of church property to others 
be observed which appears in the chapter [c. 13] Apostolicos of C. 12 
q. 2.” It would also be good to reenact that canon because according 
to the chapter [c. 20] Non liceat in the same section the Roman pontiff 
would also be forbidden to violate it, and to give his consent [to its 
violation] in other churches, as has been done up to the present. 
244. In addition in the interest of peace among the churches, let the 
statute be reenacted that provides that goods possessed for thirty 
years and privileges exercised for the same time continue to be valid, 
as is contained in chapter 18 of the Eighth Council.’ 
245. And after this let commendations and pensions be taken away 
since they interfere with proper church administration, as well as 
dispensations permitting incompatible offices and a plurality of bene- 
fices.* Let each one carry out his church duties on the basis of one 
suitable benefice, as is defined by nearly all the universal councils and 
repeated in the second part of the 23rd chapter of the Eighth 
Council.’ At present, the number of petty benefices and consequently 
of ignorant priests disgraces the church and makes the laity hostile to 
the clergy when they see so many priests living in a state of idleness 
and vice. For this reason the holy office of the priesthood is the object 
of great hatred. The text of D. 59 [c. 2] Sz officia says that a large 
number of priests is not desirable because every valuable thing should 
be scarce. For “‘it is better to have a few good ones . . .” [Decretals 1 14] 
De aetate et qualitate |c. 14] Cum sit ars artium. 
245a. [Basel Manuscript Only.] The object of elections is to express 
the decision of the majority, and various procedures have been 
devised for this purpose. Because the decision of all those voting can 
* Mansi 16, p. 168. *Mansi 16, p. 172. 
*Nicholas was himself a notorious “pluralist.” See Erich Meuthen, “Die Pfriinden des 
Cusanus,” MFCG, 2 (1962), pp. 15-66. 
» Mansi 16, pp. 172ff. 
189 


[PDF page 242]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
not be expressed without comparing all the candidates with one 
another and each one with all the others, and because this is not the 
case with the procedures now used which make this difficult and 
uncertain — since voting is not secret and fear and timidity sometimes 
make the truth keep silent — it seems that a better and truer form of 
election would be the one described below.° It makes it impossible for 
someone to be elected who is not judged the best by the common 
judgment of the electors as expressed in a single vote, and at the same 
time it preserves the secrecy of the vote so that no one can ever know 
how anyone voted. On the day before the election let the electors 
meet together and a notary make a list of all who seem to be can- 
didates from that church and from elsewhere, provided that the out- 
siders are known to the majority of the electors. And after all are 
registered, let the notary be instructed to make as many ballots as 
there are candidates, and place one name on each ballot and make 
them identical. The notary is then to give ballots in the evening to 
each elector with the names of all of the candidates, except the one 
who receives the ballot if he is one of the candidates — and he is to do 
this with all the electors in the evening while everyone is gathered 
together as a group [capitulariter|. When everyone has received his 
ballots, the superior will say a few words and recall that each is to 
compare the persons named on the ballots with the others, following 
his conscience as best he can in accordance with the will of God, and 
also recall that on the next day each is to swear after receiving com- 
munion that he has done this. And then let each one withdraw to a 
private place in his residence and look at the ballots to decide which 
one is least fit and place beside his name a single clearly visible mark. 
Then [he should decide] who is next after him and put down two 
marks, and after that three marks and so on until he comes to the last 
one who will have as many marks as there are ballots. 
On the next day let them come with their completed ballots and 
after hearing mass and receiving communion in a public place let 
them swear that each of them has compared and marked the persons 
in this way, following the right judgment of his conscience. Each one 
is to throw his ballots into a sack and when they are all in, let them 
come together in the chapter hall and read the ballots with the marks. 
®In the final version of the Concordantia the voting procedure described here was moved 
to Book 1, ch. 37, nos. 535-540 (see below). 
190 


[PDF page 243]
Book IT, para. 245a 
And the best candidate in the judgment of all will be the one who has 
the most marks and the worst the one who has the least. And to keep 
the numbers limited, if there are less than twelve candidates, let him 
[the notary] note the number of those eligible beside the name on the 
ballot, and if there are more than 12 let him note only the number 12 
and give the names of only 12 of the candidates to the electors. And 
on the next day after the results are known let the winner be placed on 
a ballot and run against another group of eleven candidates and follow 
the same procedure as before. And once the result is computed in the 
same way, even with many candidates the winner will undoubtedly be 
the one whom all consider to be best qualified. And for this purpose it 
is good to place numbers on the side of the ballots so that the electors 
do not make mistakes in marking and counting points but mark the 
number on the ballot. And a point will mark the number beneath it, 
over which it is placed. 
Let us suppose that there are three ballots. In my view Nicholas is 
best, and Conrad worst, and Peter in the middle. Then I will place a 
mark over the number 12 on the ballot of Nicholas and over number 1 
on Conrad’s ballot, and 6 on Peter’s, and do the same with all the 
other ballots. But when there are more candidates than twelve the 
process of voting may be expedited by a single voting procedure. Let 
the ballots be prepared as above with the 12 numbers and all given at 
once to the electors — without the name of the one to whom they are 
given, if he is a candidate. And then let them choose from all the 
candidates the twelve most qualified and make comparisons and mark 
them again as before and when the result is computed the one who 
has the largest number wins. In case of a tie, the older candidate wins 
— see D. 61 [c. 8] Statuimus where this is discussed. And this last 
method although it is secure and good is not so precise as when 
comparisons are made among all candidates although it can differ 
very little from it. To expedite matters more quickly perhaps and also 
because it is very close to an infallible judgment and the difference is 
almost imperceptible, the latter method can be used since it is easier 
to put into practice. It should also be known that the electors should 
consult the advice of religious men and not exclude them, for it has 
been decreed in a general synod that if an election is held without 
their consent and participation it is invalid, see D. 63 [c. 35] Obeun- 
tibus. Although custom has led in a contrary direction, it is time for 
1gI 


[PDF page 244]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
reform. This is how it [the ballot] would read: Nicholas 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 
928, 9) 10; 11, 12) Peter'1, 2) 445-5) Oy aby Ouse pe ontada, 
BANS Oi 7 ay Otel bye es 
246. And because the holy council has begun to adopt decrees on 
simony, concubinage, universal and provincial councils, and elections, 
through the Holy Spirit it will provide for all these things and will 
reduce to canonical order all pestilential practices inspired by avarice, 
and make each one carry out his responsibility and ministry. And it 
will think of the way to apply coercive force to the laws and statutes 
and how the execution of the sacred canons may be made strong and 
stable, rigorous and pure. And all power consists in this because 
[new] canons are not needed but only the application [of existing 
canons]. And they can only be properly applied by good rulers. If we 
have them, we would easily and quickly find the ways of our fathers 
through [one who is] the living law. 
CHAPTER XXXIV 
AO BRIE Pe EPLEOG UES ON WAT TASS BE ENS ALD eS 
THOSE WHO DENY THAT PETER’S PRIMACY WAS 
1D Sak EM ESS) 12 (CIsWIGS Ie AVE AUN WIS IU aI De, TIL IS 
DEMONS RAG De EA Elbe PiR NAGY @Oi IE be bOI: 
COMES FROM CHRIST BY MEANS OF THE CONSENT 
OF DEE GnURGE, AN Di EEA SEiseP OW ER GONDES 
FROM GOD BUT HIS COERCIVE FORCE THROUGH 
TEES MED TAT TON OF i hE GE wiRiG Ee 
247. The effort of the preceding little work was to begin to analyze 
the concordance which exists in the church on the basis of fundamen- 
tal first principles. Its arrangement exhibits our intent in sequence, 
although not in a way that can be easily studied in a superficial 
fashion. Nevertheless an attempt will be made to summarize it. There 
is no doubt that Christ is the way, the life, and the truth, the head and 
foundation of the church, see Ephesians 4 and 5 and 1 Cor. ro and 
the gloss on the verse of Matthew 16: “Thou art Peter” and 
Augustine in his book, Retractions, on the Gospel on John, and in 
192 


[PDF page 245]
Book IT, para. 248 
many of his sermons! and many other authors, nearly all Doctors of 
the Church. The faith will never fail in the church for [the prayer of] 
Christ was heard and he will remain with the successors of the 
apostles until the end of the world.” Hence there will always be a body 
of believers in Christ among whom Christ himself will dwell. That 
Christ-formed body of the faithful in which Christ will dwell is called 
the Catholic church in which the way and the truth which is Christ 
will always thus remain. I showed in relatively brief fashion in Book 1 
of this work — which is difficult to summarize — that the one universal 
church is made up of all rational spirits adhering to Christ and that 
there is a trinitarian structure in the universal church made up of one 
part triumphant, and another part militant, and a third sleeping. I also 
discussed the need to understand the relationship between the church 
militant where the Truth that is Christ is still understood as a figure 
and a mystery, and that face-to-face Truth which is in heaven with 
the church triumphant. In this way as far as possible the admirable 
order among the various hierarchical ranks in the church militant may 
be known to some degree for our guidance. 
248. After this in Book 11 I wished to examine the question of the 
superiority of the council of the universal church over the particular 
authority of any individual church ruler and local synod. On the basis 
of fundamental principles, I directed the reasoning intellect to this 
conclusion: If the universal Catholic church is infallibly directed by 
the assistance of Christ, when the assent of all Christians is given to 
any conclusion as necessary to salvation, it follows that that conclusion 
is part of the Christian faith and true. And when the universal council 
comes to such a conclusion with the consent and representation of all 
the faithful, of necessity it has the assistance of Christ and the inspira- 
tion of the Holy Spirit and dictates this truly and infallibly, for no 
truth that directs one to eternal salvation can exist except through 
Christ. But the universal council is made up of the bishops and their 
representatives who come to that meeting to investigate some matter 
which has not been settled in their own provinces. They meet 
together in vain, however, if the consent of their subjects to these 
things has not been given. But if a council is correctly and legitimately 
called and gathered together and if everyone has received a summons, 
and it is held in freedom and properly concluded with the common 
'PL 32, p. 616 and 38, pp. 479, 1148, 1238, and 1349. 
Luke 22:32; Hebrews 5:7; Matthew 28:20. 
193 


[PDF page 246]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
consent of all and it issues a decree in any matter concerning the 
salvation of the faithful, history reveals that it has never erred, since it 
proximately represents the whole Catholic church and the consent of 
all the faithful who participate through their representatives and 
bishops. 
249. But the provincial synods — even those of the Roman pontiffs — 
do not have this privilege. And because various writings of jurists and 
theologians, especially those in recent times, exalt the authority of the 
pope even over that of the synods themselves, it has been necessary 
to seek to harmonize these writings, while maintaining the aforesaid 
truth. Therefore I have pointed out the differences between the 
universal council of the Catholic church and that of a nation, king- 
dom, or patriarchate on the basis of the acts of the councils which 
have been approved as authentic — as appears in D. 19 c. 1 — so that 
anyone who understands the difference may easily see that it is true 
that the universal council of the Catholic church has supreme power 
in all things over the Roman pontiff himself. And thus it was necess- 
ary to ask what was the authority of the Roman pontiff both as to 
rulership and as to the power to command and to legislate. And 
although I have used many arguments, I have emphasized this one — 
that although according to writings of many of the holy Fathers the 
power of the Roman pontiff is from God and according to others it 
comes from man and the universal council, it seems that in fact the 
intermediate position demonstrable in the Scriptures finally comes to 
this, that the power of the Roman pontiff as to preeminence, priority, 
and rulership, is from God by way of man and the councils; namely, 
by means of elective consent. 
250. I discussed first the freedom of Christ’s law to which one 
adheres voluntarily and without coercion. Hence since Christ himself 
is the Way of our faith, the only thing necessary for salvation is Christ 
and free access to him. Therefore in the church which is descended 
from Christ there should be no coercion but rather grace flowing 
from the fullness of the source, the Head, down to the Mystical Body 
of Christ. And this is what [C.] 7 q. 1 [c. 30] Remoto says — that the 
grace of the sacerdotal offices comes from God. 
251. Indeed we say that all the apostles are equal in the grace of the 
apostolate just as in the grace of the priesthood all priests are equal, 
but we say that Peter was first among the apostles by virtue of a 
superabundance of grace. Augustine says in his last sermon on [the 
194 


[PDF page 247]
Book Il, para. 252 
Gospel of] John, that because of abundant grace Peter was both the 
first apostle and on account of his primacy among the apostles also 
represented the church as a symbol of the whole.’ And the sacred 
writings describe the primacy with which Peter was endowed with a 
superabundance of grace by Christ, in the first chapter of John where 
Christ says, “Thou shalt be called Cephas,” which is interpreted 
Peter. Augustine in his seventh sermon comments on this passage as 
follows: “He made a great change when he changed Simon’s name to 
Peter. But Peter is from rock [petra] and the rock is the church. 
Therefore the name of Peter symbolized the church.’’* Observe that 
according to the interpretation of the great and learned Augustine, 
the change in name was important. When Christ said, “Thou art 
Peter,” he used the present tense, where he had said earlier — in the 
future tense — “Thou shalt be called Cephas.” He did not say then, 
“Thou art named or called Peter” but “Thou art Peter.” From this it 
is evident that the promise of Christ that Simon would in the future 
be called Cephas was a promise of a real primacy. Hence when 
Augustine says that Peter had the primacy among the apostles he can 
not be interpreted as speaking of the time of his conversion or his 
recognition of the Messiah, as the name Peter is interpreted (accord- 
ing to Bede, incorrectly) to mean “the one who recognizes” by writers 
such as Alexander of Hales commenting on John.’ He adds on the 
same point that his brother, Andrew, who told him earlier that he had 
found the Messiah had already preceded him in that recognition, as 
we read in the first chapter of the Gospel of John.° Therefore 
Augustine himself understands the primacy among the others in the 
church as necessarily referring to the rulership and eminence which 
Peter received after the college of the apostles had been created when 
Christ said, “Thou art Peter.” 
252. From the above it is evident that this is why Simon was called 
Peter or Cephas. Jerome commenting on the Epistle to the Galatians 
says that the prince of the apostles is not called both Peter and Cephas 
with two different meanings because they mean the same thing. Peter 
in Greek and Latin is derived from petra [rock] and is the same thing 
as Cephas.’ Bede says that Peter is not Hebrew since the letter “P” 
does not exist among the Hebrews.* Alexander of Hales in his Postilla 
SPL35, pe1078: *PL 35, p. 1444. 5PL 92, p. 22. 
®John 1:40ff. 7PL 26, p. 366. 
SPL go, p. 141. The letter P is discussed by St. Jerome (PL 12, p. 892). 
195 


[PDF page 248]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
super Joannem says that Jerome says the same thing. And some say that 
Cephas is not Hebrew but Syrian. However this may be, in discussing 
the text, “Thou art Peter and upon this rock,” like Augustine, 
Ambrose, and other doctors, we should hold that Peter is from petra, 
and thus Petrus is a Latin and not a Hebrew name. And this seems to 
be proven from the text of the first chapter of John because John puts 
down two Hebrew words directly above in the same chapter — namely, 
Rabbi and Messiah, and immediately adds a translation.’ And so it 
seems that Cephas is either Syrian or Hebrew and Petrus its Latin or 
Greek translation and not the reverse; namely, that Cephas is Greek 
translated into Hebrew as Petrus. 
253. And while I write this, one thing occurs to me that should be 
noted. The text of chapter 1 of [the Gospel of] John says that the 
name, Peter, is the translation of the name, Cephas. Therefore since 
kephe in Greek is translated as caput [head] in Latin, the name, Peter, 
should also have this meaning and not the other translations that St. 
Jerome gives in his work on Greek names. There is no doubt that 
John the Evangelist wrote his Gospel in Greek and thus made his own 
translation of the name, Peter, to show that the name that Christ gave 
to Simon fits that meaning. Therefore it would perhaps not be absurd 
to say that the [Latin] name Petrus comes from the Hebrew det-ros and 
so among us is put down as “pet” because the Hebrew “bet” is 
expressed with a strong hard pronunciation of the first letter, “‘b,”’ in 
the way that we pronounce “p.” In this interpretation Peter would 
mean in Hebrew, “the head of the house.” And this meaning fits the 
Gospel and the intention of Christ according to that Gospel and the 
explanation of the saints who say that Peter was constituted as head of 
the church or house by Christ. This is what is said in the chapter [c. 
2] Sacrosancta of D. 22 where the term, ‘“‘Cephas,” is interpreted as 
“head,” which would make Cephas a Greek word.'° 
254. But despite what is said in Sacrosancta, which is attributed to 
Anacletus, I think we should rather stay with the first doctors since I 
believe those letters of Anacletus are apocryphal, as I say below in the 
third book.'' However I do not deny that a final point is to be taken 
into consideration: Peter is named first in the first chapter of the Acts 
“ 
*John 1:38 and 1:41. 
10 As John 1:42 clearly states, Cephas is Hebrew for rock (Petra in Latin). 
'l Nevertheless, Anacletus’ letters are cited in Book n, nos. 1 18, 140, and 261, as well as in 
Book 1, nos. 307-309. 
196 


[PDF page 249]
Book Il, para. 256 
of the Apostles because he is the head, and as such he proposed that 
the commands of Christ be carried out which Christ had committed 
to him in particular as the first of the apostles and their head. Hence 
although all the apostles were rectors, pastors, and vicars of Christ, as 
is sung in the Preface of the feastday Mass of any of them, neverthe- 
less in that pastorate, rectorship, and vicariate, the holy doctors affirm 
that Peter possessed the primacy by more abundant grace because the 
keys were promised and given to him as the representative of the 
whole church and his pastorate was commanded in the words, “Feed 
my sheep.”!? 
255. But since he had been given that pastorate chosen as the first 
and principal apostle among the others, immediately after the ascen- 
sion of Christ Peter began to exercise command in every assembly of 
the faithful in the way that rulers are accustomed to do. Hence Peter 
first showed that he was the vicar of Christ by teaching and baptizing 
at Jerusalem as the first among the apostles, as appears in Acts, chap- 
ters 1, 2, and 3 and in Luke, chapter 6. Similarly in the same passages 
it is clear that Peter was the first bishop of Jerusalem because he did 
the things that someone in the rank of bishop does. And after that he 
was bishop of Antioch as appears in the second chapter of Galatians; 
then in Rome where he wrote his first epistle, as is evident from its 
conclusion which says, “The church which is in Babylon greets 
you.” And according to Jerome and Bede and all the interpreters 
whom I have read, that Babylon was Rome because it was the 
daughter of old Babylon. For Rome acted precisely as the monarchy 
of Babylon acted, as Paulus Orosius declares at length at the begin- 
ning of the seventh book of his Histories." And the commentators on 
the Apocalypse often write that the kingdom of Babylon is that of 
Rome. But this is not on our subject. 
256. Although a certain Marsilius of Padua whose work I have seen 
after writing this volume seems to say in a certain place in the second 
part [of his book] that it can not be proved from the canon of the Bible 
that Peter was bishop of Rome, or that he even was at Rome," suffice 
it for us to say that this is false on the basis of the aforesaid epistle of 
Peter, as the doctors explain. And none of the holy doctors up to this 
"2 Acts 1:13 and John 21:17. 
'Sy Peter 5:13. PL 31, pp. robaff. 
'S Marsilius, The Defender of Peace, D. 2, c. 16 (trans. Alan Gewirth), New York, 11, 1956, 
pp. 24rff. 
197 


[PDF page 250]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
time has ever denied this. For instance Alypius, Augustine, Optatus of 
Milevis, St. Jerome and all the others who have given a list of the 
Roman pontiffs in their writings, begin with Peter. Optatus says in the 
second book of Against Parmenianus that there is no doubt that the 
Roman see goes back in unbroken succession to Peter who held the 
see there first, and that it is joined to Christ through him,"° and I think 
that on this point no Catholic can disagree with the holy fathers whose 
writings are approved by the church. But approved doctors agree with 
what is said above. For example, in Book 1 of his work, Against 
Jovinian, when Jovinian says in opposition to virginity that the church 
was founded on Peter, not on John, St. Jerome says, “The church is 
founded on Peter although in another place it is founded on all the 
apostles and they all receive the keys of the kingdom of heaven and 
the strength of the church is confirmed equally in all. One, however, 
was chosen among the twelve so that by establishing a single head the 
possibility of schism might be removed. But why was not John chosen 
who was a virgin? Deference was given to age because Peter was 
older. Otherwise an adolescent — a mere boy — would have been 
placed over men who were adults. Also the Good Master who should 
have eliminated any possibility of contention among the disciples said 
to them, ‘My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave unto you,’ and 
‘whoever wants to be greater among you, let him be the least of all’ so 
as not to provide a reason for envy of the young man whom he 
loved.’’!’ Note that this is the opinion of St Jerome whom we can not 
contradict. 
From this we conclude that Peter was established by Christ as head 
of the apostles with authority over them — notwithstanding the fact 
that the church was equally founded on all the apostles. And when he 
[Jerome] writes to Pope Damasus concerning his faith he says that 
Peter’s see was in Rome — “This is the faith” and below “Thou who 
holdest the faith and see of Peter.”’'* To the same effect see Cyprian 
in [C.] 24 q. 1 [c. 18] Loguitur; Gregory in D. 50 [c. 53] Con- 
siderandum, and Ambrose in the same Distinction [c. 54] Fidelior, 
Clement in D. 80 [c. 2] Jn illis; Augustine in [C.] 2 q. 7 [c. 35] Puto. It 
'© Optatus of Milevis, De schismate Donatistarum, c. 2 (PL 11, P- 947). 
'7 St. Jerome, Contra Jovinianum, 1, 26 (PL 23, pp. 258ff.). 
'8 Gratian’s Decretum attributed this to St. Jerome, but it comes from another collection 
(Kallen, DCC, p. 299). 
198 


[PDF page 251]
Book IT, para. 258 
is not necessary to quote their writings for the Catholic church has 
never dissented from this opinion. 
257. But the governing power that belongs to Peter does not consist 
in superiority in the power of binding and loosing [either] in a matter 
of penance or in the distribution of sacraments. There is no doubt on 
the latter point, and the earlier point set forth above is not to be 
doubted because the power of judging in spiritual matters is the same 
for all bishops as it was for all the apostles since it comes from Christ 
through the intermediary of the priest. Thus Jerome says on the 
passage in Matthew [ch.] 16, ““Whatsoever you shall loose.” “The 
other apostles indeed have the same power of judging since he said to 
them after the Resurrection, ‘Receive ye the Holy Spirit.’””'? And 
many passages are quoted above on the same point. Nor was Peter 
greater than the church by reason of his primacy because he was 
named by and for the church, as Augustine says in the place quoted 
above as well as Ambrose in D. 50 [c. 54] Fidelior and the other 
doctors referred to above. Therefore that supremacy of Peter was not 
a supremacy over, but within, the church. Hence although he was the 
spokesman and the head of the apostles and of the church and pro- 
posed actions in its name, as in the first chapter of the Acts, and spoke 
for it, as in Acts 2, he was no less subject to it as a member. Therefore 
he arose in the midst of the faithful and spoke with reverence for the 
church, and in Acts, chapter 8, allowed it to send him to Samaria. For 
in their ordination to that true life and truth [who is] Christ, the Lord 
and our head, all the faithful since they are sons of God by regenera- 
tion in Christ are only brothers because there is no master but Christ 
himself. See Matthew 23, “Do not call one another, Rabbi. For there 
is one who is your Master,” Christ, and “you are all brothers.”” Hence 
in this respect, there is a brotherhood of the faithful in Christ, 
although by divine intention a superiority in grace continues within 
that brotherhood. 
258. Hence although Peter might have been the first apostle as 
explained above, that primacy did not contradict that brotherhood of 
the apostles in the church. For Peter was no more a son of God than 
any other holy apostle although he might have been given more 
abundant grace. And we should note the letter of Pope St. Gregory on 
St. Jerome, as quoted in the Ordinary Gloss to Matthew’s Gospel. 
199 


[PDF page 252]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
this subject to Patriarch John of Constantinople in the Papal Register 
No. 214 which begins, Eo tempore. There he tries to show that no 
bishop possesses a power to rule in the church by virtue of which all 
members of the church are subject to him. Rather he says anyone who 
claims this is like Lucifer because he tries to place his throne or see 
above the stars of heaven, “For what are your brothers, all the bishops 
of the universal church, but stars of heaven. When with exaggerated 
language you desire to make yourself superior to them and to trample 
their name in the dust in comparison with your own, what are you 
saying but, ‘I shall arise to heaven,’ ‘I shall exalt my throne over the 
stars of heaven?’ ”’ And below, “Certainly Peter, the first apostle, was 
a member of the holy and universal church, [and] Paul, Andrew, John, 
what else were they but the heads of individual communities? And all 
the members are under one head, Christ.” And below, ““No Roman 
Pontiff ever claimed for himself this rash title, universal bishop, lest if 
they seemed to claim a special honorific title for themselves as pon- 
tiffs, they might appear to deny it to their brethren.’”’”” And the same 
thing is said in Letter no. 211, written to Anastasius of Antioch, which 
begins, Cum praedicator egregius where he concludes that we are all one 
in our head, Christ, who is the pastor of all, and there is no man to 
whom all the members of Christ are subject and consequently there is 
no universal patriarch because, if it is allowed to say this, the honor of 
all the patriarchs is denied and no longer is any bishop found to be a 
true bishop etc.*! 
259. But as for the members of the church themselves as separate 
individuals, we see that by more abundant grace the rulership which 
was necessary to avoid schism was handed over by Christ to Peter for 
the well-ordered government of the church, as we read in St. Jerome, 
so that as he was the first among the individual members, he might 
also be the servant and minister of all; [this is] because if Peter 
receives his name from petra on account of the church, and the church 
is nothing other than the union of the faithful in the church, rulership 
exists for the sake of the unity of the faithful in order to avoid schism. 
Therefore it is for the service and preservation of the unity of the 
faithful that rulership over individuals exists. From this the union of 
the faithful which we call the church, or the universal council of the 
Catholic church representing it, is superior to its minister and 
20 Papal Register, V, 44, and Kramer, “Die Briisseler Handschriften” (see 11, 21, no. 4). 
71 Papal Register, V, 41. 
200 


[PDF page 253]
Book IT, para. 261 
individual ruler. And so I understand the words of the Savior in this 
way — that he [Peter] should be the greatest of the apostles considered 
as individuals, but the minister of all of them collectively, as compris- 
ing the church. I do not mean by this that the presiding curate is 
absolved from a special ministerial care of each of those under him, 
but although he is the minister of each one he remains the superior of 
everyone in the exercise of his power of pastoral care — although as 
explained above, he is not superior to all collectively. 
260. Also as touched on above: the power to rule is not rooted and 
established in the church by God in a coercive fashion but for the 
purpose of ministerial care. This is proved by a quotation from the 
first chapter of 2nd Corinthians: “For we do not lord it over you in 
your faith but we are your helpers,” on which the Gloss by [St.] 
Ambrose says, “Faith does not permit domination and coercion since 
it is voluntary, not forced.””? And Chrysostom in chapter 3 of the 
second book of Dialogues says, “But in the church, one should be 
converted to better things by agreement not by force.”*’ And 
Augustine writing on the last chapter of the First Epistle to Timothy, 
beginning “Whoever are under the yoke” says, “It should be known 
that some have preached that freedom is common to all in Christ. 
This is true of spiritual freedom but not of physical freedom.”””* More 
quotations could be given, [but] it is sufficient to know that only one 
who comes of his own free will and not under compulsion is accept- 
able to Christ. Therefore in its basis from Christ all spiritual power is 
properly founded in freedom and not in coercion. 
261. But because that rulership exists from God for the purpose of 
unity in order to prevent schism, unless an ecclesiastical ruler has 
some coercive power — although not the domination that princes 
exercise — unity can not be rightly preserved. For the rotten member 
and foot should be cut off and the eye that scandalizes torn out of the 
church if the body of the church is to be kept healthy. Therefore that 
coercion will not be like that which princes exercise because their way 
of ruling is by force on the body and over property. It will be a 
coercion based on the free subjection of all or a majority, and punish- 
ment will only be imposed when it works for the salvation of those 
punished. Therefore Pope Anacletus and others noted above say that 
op) aes é 
“<2 Corinthians 1:23. 
°3St, John Chrysostom, De Sacerdotio, 11, 3 (PG 47, p. 634). 
*4St. Augustine in Gloss on 1 Timothy 6:1. 
201 


[PDF page 254]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
Christ established Peter as the head with the consent of the apostles.” 
And so the coercive power of a superior over his subjects is based on 
their election and consent. For those who before were completely free 
subject themselves to their ruler by election. Hence on this basis it is 
often said above that the coercive power of a ruler or a law comes 
from the approval of the subjects and derives its strength from the 
tacit or express consent of the community. Hence it is said although 
“all power is from above,””° whether coercive, domestic, restraining 
or commanding, for it to operate externally to restrain or compel free 
Christian men proper procedure requires their free subjection since 
they are not constrained by Christian or natural law beyond the limits 
of freedom. 
262. In this way, I attempted above to argue further that every 
ecclesiastical or spiritual rulership was established by Christ through 
the mediation of human consent. For legitimate superiors are those 
established by the consent of their subjects. We are obliged to obey 
them because of having given them our consent as established in 
authority by men from among men. But it is quite clear from this that 
on this basis — which I believe to be true — unless it appeared by some 
miracle or sign that God wished someone to rule before he had 
obtained the consent of the faithful (in which case all Christians 
would be obliged to obey the divine command), the Roman pontiff 
can still not be proved to be the ruler of the church for all times. For 
even if Peter definitely had that rulership, we do not read in the 
sacred writings that therefore the Roman pontiff, his successor — or 
the [patriarchs] of Antioch or Jerusalem since they are also his suc- 
cessors —, has had or should have it, except with the aforesaid com- 
mon consent of the church similar to that of the apostles to Peter. 
Hence although the pontiff in Rome, whether because it was the see 
of Peter or as the principal city among the other bishoprics in the 
world, is venerated as the most illustrious and distinguished authority 
in that great city and the occupant of the great see of Peter, yet unless 
he had the elective consent to their subordination from the represen- 
tatives of all the others I would not believe that he was the leader or 
ruler or judge of all the others. Therefore if, for instance, the Arch- 
bishop of Trier were elected as ruler and head by the church gathered 
together, he would more properly be the successor of Peter as ruler 
*° See no. 254, where the letters of Anacletus are declared to be apocryphal. 
26Romans 13:1. 
202 


[PDF page 255]
Book I, para. 265 
than the bishop of Rome — although we should believe that the 
Roman pontiff will never lose the see of Peter and the rulership in this 
way. But succession in a geographical location does not argue to 
succession in rule, as is demonstrated by the cases of Antioch and 
Jerusalem, and that rulership would not cease in the church even if 
the episcopal see of the city of Rome ceased to exist. I have spoken on 
this at greater length above. 
263. And it is evident that the church has the power freely to choose 
its head, since it has received from Christ everything it needs for its 
survival. Prelates have all power of binding and loosing because they 
have been sent by Christ as Christ was sent by the Father as is evident 
from the words of Christ in the 2oth chapter of John, “As the Father 
hath sent me,” etc. Thus it appears that as Christ was the true Son of 
God, so the church which is the Mystical body of Christ has a similar 
mission from Christ. Hence the church has the same missionary 
power as Christ. 
264. And so [ adhere to the conclusion that the primacy in the 
church is established in its reality by Christ through the church for 
the purpose of church unity and is intended by God as a ministry for 
its service. And in my judgment the arguments on the one side that 
coercive rulership in the church comes only from God, and on the 
other side that it exists only by the election and consent of men and 
the church, are correctly harmonized in this intermediate position. 
265. But I assert none of my ideas so firmly that I would not say that 
one should accept those of more learned men. For Ambrose says, 
“One’s own writings deceive. They are heard with delight like ill- 
formed offspring, and thus his shameless words please their author,” 
as he writes in the 33rd letter to Sabinus.”’ Nevertheless I think that 
this opinion is less offensive to the church and therefore should be 
considered as more true than those of Marsilius of Padua in his book, 
The Defender of Peace {Defensor Pacis], since he can only defend his 
opinion on the basis of the text of St. Augustine in D. 9 [c. 5] Ego solis, 
and he answers all arguments to the contrary by saying that we are not 
bound to accept the authority of the doctors except insofar as they are 
based on the canon of the Bible. This is a pernicious opinion after the 
church has approved [the writings of] the doctors as acceptable. 
Hence we should abandon such presumption and follow the texts in 
271, 16, p. 1195. 
203 


[PDF page 256]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
D. 12 [D. 11] [c. 5] Ecclesiasticarum and other things said there. As 
noted above the arguments of Marsilius [on the lack of biblical 
foundation for papal primacy] are not true, for when the doctors speak 
of the primacy of Peter they base their discussion on the words of 
Christ that are contained in the canon of the Bible and not on other 
historical accounts concerning Peter — although these too should not 
be denied, for the saints believed that they were true, as letter 76 of 
Ambrose to Auxentius concerning the handing over of churches, 
proves.”* 
266. And consequently since all disorder comes from the fact that 
superiors do not exercise their power for the purpose for which their 
pastoral rule was established and their subjects do not loyally obey 
their superiors as their status demands, we have felt obliged to speak 
of the canonical rules by which the holy fathers maintained the con- 
cordance between rulers and their subjects. Therefore we had first to 
discuss the council of the Catholic church which has supreme auth- 
ority by consent of all to establish and regulate whatever leads to 
salvation; then we spoke of other particular councils, and after that of 
the reforming canons which have now been issued so that this holy 
Council of Basel may proceed to follow the footsteps of the fathers in 
what it does, modeling itself on the teaching of the holy fathers and 
the statutes of the sacred councils. 
267. And this is the comprehensive summary of Books 1 and Uy, 
subject to any correction, delivered in writing, however confused and 
rough, for the sole purpose of providing an incentive for further study 
by those concerned. 
End of Book 
2> pie tos parosa: 
204 


[PDF page 257]
PARES EVAYG TE: 
268. If anyone should care to trace out from the beginning the 
foundations that are both necessary and useful for our purpose, he 
should look to the principles on which they are based — those of 
Aristotle, Plato, Cicero, and all the other philosophers who have 
written about well-ordered political, economic, and monarchic 
regimes.' Natural laws precede all human considerations and provide 
the principles for them all. First, nature intends every kind of animal 
to preserve its physical existence and its life, to avoid what would be 
harmful and to secure what is necessary to it, as Cicero concludes in 
the first book, third [fourth] chapter of De officiis.? For the first 
requirement of essence is that it exist. Therefore for any essence to 
exist, it possesses inborn faculties designed for this purpose — instinct, 
appetite, and reason. Hence it happens in different ways in nature 
that various means are implanted by natural instinct for the purpose of 
existence and self preservation. On this basis Aristotle concludes in 
the last chapter of the seventh book of the Politics that every art and 
discipline exists to supply what nature lacks.” 
269. But from the beginning men have been endowed with reason 
which distinguishes them from animals. They know because of the 
exercise of their reason that association and sharing are most useful — 
indeed necessary for their self-preservation and to achieve the 
purpose of human existence. Therefore by natural instinct they have 
joined together and built villages and cities in which to live together. 
And if men had not established rules to preserve peace, the corrupt 
'The classical authors cited in the preface are taken without acknowledgment from 
Marsilius of Padua, Defender of Peace (1324), a work condemned by the church for its 
attacks on the pope, but widely read — see Paul E. Sigmund, “The Unacknowledged 
Influence of Marsilius of Padua on xvth Century Conciliarism,” Journal of the History of 
Ideas, 23, 3 (1962), pp. 392-402. 
2 Cf. Marsilius, Defender, 1, 4, 2. 
> Marsilius, Defender, 1, 5, 4; 1, 7, 2. Marsilius uses a different order of the books of 
Aristotle’s Politics than in modern editions. 
205 


[PDF page 258]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
desires of many would have prevented this union from improving 
human life. For this reason cities arose in which the citizens united 
and adopted laws with the common assent of all to preserve unity and 
harmony, and they established guardians of all these laws with the 
power necessary to provide for the public good.* 
270. It was clear that by a marvelous and beneficent divine law 
infused in all men, they knew that associating together would be most 
beneficial to them and that social life would be maintained by laws 
adopted with the common consent of all — or at least with the consent 
of the wise and illustrious and the agreement of the others.? For just 
as it is asserted in the preceding Book that according to St. Cyprian 
Christ has promised that the majority of the priesthood will not depart 
from the true law,° so also when by common consent matters are 
discussed that concern the preservation of the commonwealth, the 
majority of the populace, citizens or illustrious men will not depart 
from the right way appropriate to the time. Otherwise it would happen 
that a natural appetite would be frustrated in many cases which is 
considered most unfitting by the philosophers. For we see that man is 
a political and civic animal naturally inclined to civilized life. Hence 
the weightier part ought to act for the remainder of the polity, as 
Aristotle concludes in the first chapter of Book 1 of the Politics.’ 
271. But Almighty God has assigned a certain natural servitude to 
the ignorant and stupid so that they readily trust the wise to help them 
to preserve themselves, as appears in the eighth letter of Ambrose 
after the quotation from Calanus’ letter to Alexander, ‘““The unwise 
man is like a farm; the man who lacks sense is like a vine.” “The 
pruned vine brings forth fruit; cut back, it flourishes; neglected it 
grows wild.’’* 
272. On this subject Ambrose writes most elegantly in his seventh 
letter, immediately above, “With profound argument philosophers 
have concluded that the wise man is free and the stupid man a slave. 
But long before, David said, “The fool is changeable as the moon.”? 
*The entire paragraph is a summary of Marsilius, Defender, 1, 3, 3. 
> Marsilius, Defender, 1, 9, 103 1, 13, ff. 
° Book ll, 4, no. 79. See also Book 1, 8, no. 43. 
‘The term “weightier part,” is a clear sign of the influence of Marsilius, rather than of 
Aristotle who simply refers to a “‘stronger part.” See Marsilius, Defender, 1, 13, 2 and 
Aristotle’s Politics, tv, 12, 1. 
*Marsilius, Defender, 11, 13, 1; St. Ambrose, Ad Simplicianum (PL 16, p. 1141). 
’ Ecclesiasticus 27:11 (not Psalms of David). 
206 


[PDF page 259]
Book III, para. 272 
The wise man is not overcome by fear; he is not changed by power; 
not seduced by prosperity nor overwhelmed in adversity. Where there 
is wisdom, there is courage of spirit, perseverance, and fortitude. For 
the wise man is constant in spirit; he is not affected by alterations in 
fortune. He is not changeable as a child nor blown about by every 
wind of doctrine.” And further, ‘““Noah, when he had heard that his 
son, Ham, had foolishly laughed at his father’s nakedness, cursed him 
saying, ‘Cursed be Ham: he shall be a household slave to his breth- 
ren.’ And he made his brothers masters over him for they had wisely 
concluded that they should have respect for their father’s age. Did not 
Jacob, a fount of all learning, who was preterred to his older brother 
because of his wisdom, demonstrate his abundant powers of argu- 
ment to all? His devoted father was torn between his two sons in 
fatherly affection but he finally decided between them — since affec- 
tion acts out of natural necessity but decisions are made on the basis 
of merit — and gave the one his favor and the other his pity — favoring 
the wise one and pitying the foolish one because he could not rise up 
by his own efforts and direct himself to virtue by his own efforts. He 
blessed him calling on him to serve his brother and be his slave, thus 
demonstrating that ignorance is worse than slavery, that he was to be a 
slave as a remedy for his ignorance because the foolish man can not 
control himself and unless he had someone to direct him he would fail 
in his efforts. Therefore his loving father deliberately made him a 
slave of his brother so that he would be guided by his counsel. And so 
certain wise men act as guides for the unthinking people. They con- 
trol the ignorance of the people by their own force and rule them 
through the imposition of their power which they use to compel the 
unwilling to obey those who are wiser and to submit to the laws. 
Therefore he put a yoke on the foolish one as if he were a wild animal 
and since he had said he should live by the sword, he took away his 
liberty so that he would not perish in his recklessness. He placed his 
brother over him so that subject to his moderating influence he might 
be converted. Servitude can be by choice — it is less worthy if by 
compulsion and better if freely chosen, since good is more 
meritorious when performed freely rather than out of necessity. 
Therefore first he placed the yoke of necessity on him, then he also 
gave him the blessing of a voluntary subjection. For nature does not 
make a slave, but ignorance, nor does manumission make one free, 
but learning. Therefore Esau was born free and became a slave and 
207 


[PDF page 260]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
Joseph who was sold into slavery was chosen to exercise power over 
those who had bought him.”'° 
273. And after Ambrose elegantly describes the freedom of the wise 
man, how law is only imposed on the ignorant, and how because of sin 
he is compelled by fear of punishment to obey the law, he adds, 
“Therefore the sinner is a slave of fear, a slave of desire, a slave of 
avarice, a slave of lust, a slave of malice, a slave of anger. Though he 
seems to himself in this way to be free, he is more a slave than if he 
were subjected to tyrants. For those who live by law are free. But true 
law is righteousness. True law is not carved on tablets nor cut in 
bronze but stamped on the mind and imprinted on the senses. Since 
the wise man is not under the law he is a law unto himself, carrying 
the work of the law in his heart, inscribed in him with the pen of 
nature.”!! 
274. The most excellent and learned Ambrose writes these and 
other important words in that letter and the one which follows. From 
this one thing is to be kept in mind — that although the ignorant could 
not govern themselves and so became slaves of the wise out of necess- 
ity, the subjection based on that necessity which resulted from that 
need was voluntary. 
275. And thus by a certain natural instinct, the rule of the wise and 
the subjection of the ignorant is harmonized through common laws 
that have the wise as their special authors, protectors, and executors, 
and the concurrent agreement of all the others in voluntary subjec- 
tion. And when a government is so organized, then “it is impossible 
for an aristocracy, that is a city governed according to virtue” by the 
wise with the consent of the others for the common good, “not to be 
well ordered,” as Aristotle says in Book tv, chapter 7 [8] of the 
Politics."* 
276. Legislation ought to be adopted by all those who are to be 
bound by it or by a majority of their representatives because it should 
benefit the common good and what touches all should be approved by 
all and the definition of the common good only comes from the 
consent of all or of a majority. There can be no excuse for not obeying 
the law when everyone has imposed the law on himself. “It is not good 
to adopt good laws and then not obey them,” as Aristotle says in Book 
'OPL 16, pp. 1130-1132. INP 16, p. 11395 2 ene . . . mete, . . 
"2 Marsilius, Defender, 1, 13, 2. Aristotle (in Politics, 11, 7) said nothing about consent as a 
prerequisite for aristocracy. That requirement was added by Marsilius. 
208 


[PDF page 261]
Book III, para. 279 
Iv, chapter 7 [8] of the Politics. And it is also the duty of those who 
adopt the laws to interpret them. It is necessary for a kingdom to be 
governed by laws, since men are subject to the passions of love and 
hate.! 
277. Therefore it is better for a commonwealth to be ruled by laws 
than by the best of men, as Aristotle concludes when he discusses this 
in Book 11, chapter 9 [15] of the Politics, as well as in Book 1, chapter 1 
of the Rhetoric. For where laws do not rule, there is no polity, as is 
stated in Book tv, chapter 4, of the Politics. But laws ought to be 
adopted with great care and prudence based on long experience, as is 
said in Book ul, chapter 2 [5] of the Politics. 
278. Rulers should act to observe the laws and should rule in 
accordance with those laws as is said in Book 11, chapter 6 [11] of the 
Politics, for law is “an eye from many eyes” and “reason free from 
passion” as is said in Book 11, chapter g [15] of the Politics. Rulers 
should not change laws made by the majority which have been 
accepted by everyone.'* 
279. While the prince should rule according to the laws, yet since he 
may decide matters about which nothing is said clearly in the laws, as 
appears in Book mm, chapter 6 [11] of the Politics, he should be 
prudent — as is said in Book 1, chapter 2 [4] of the Politics, and in 
Book tv [v, ch. 6] of the Ethics on justice — and exercise equity 
[epikeizare| correctly in accordance with the spirit of the law where it is 
not specific about particulars. And then every form of government 
whether it is a monarchy exercised by one man, or an aristocracy 
exercised by several wise men, or a polity by all at the same time and 
each one according to his rank, when it tends to the common good in 
accordance with the will of the subject is called temperate or just, as is 
stated by Aristotle in Books m and 1v of the Politics. But if it tends to 
the particular good of the ruler and is contrary to the will of the 
subjects, it is intemperate, as is stated in Book 1m, chapter 5 [chs. 7-8] 
of the Politics. And thus three types of government arise opposite to 
the temperate ones mentioned above, tyranny, oligarchy, and 
democracy. And the history books are filled with these intemperate 
tyrannical, oligarchic, and democratic governments.'° 
'3 Marsilius, Defender, 1, 12. 
'4 Marsilius, Defender, 1, 11. (The source of all the references to Aristotle in nos. 277 and 
278). 
'S Marsilius, Defender, 1, 15. 
209 


[PDF page 262]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
280. For Nimrod began to be a sturdy hunter immediately after the 
Flood,'® and it was Ninus, the first king of the Assyrians and the son 
of Belus, who first took arms because he desired to rule. After him 
came Semiramis, his wife, who, the historians say, expelled from the 
kingdom Trebeta, her stepson, the son of Ninus by another Chaldean 
wife because she was in love with him — which he properly rejected 
because she was his stepmother. She pursued him and he went to 
Europe and finally chose a dwelling place in a certain pleasant field 
with the Moselle flowing by — Ausonius has composed a most admir- 
able poem on the name of this river — and there 42 years after the 
birth of Abraham he founded our city of Trier which is named after 
him [77reberica] and the ancient histories say it was the first city to be 
founded in Europe.’ But this is beside the point. 
281. But it would be superfluous to narrate in this work what is 
known to all about temperate governments, how Moses and Aaron 
and Eleazar, and in the Roman commonwealth, first the kings then 
the senate and consuls and also the emperors, were established by 
voluntary consent for the common good.'* 
282. There are many reasons why there should only be one ruler, 
even if the government is made up of several leading men united in 
agreement. Otherwise confusion would arise when several compete in 
ruling and good order would be destroyed when the subjects do not 
know whom to obey. It is bad to have many rulers, for there should be 
one to whom a final appeal can be made with certainty. But every 
monarchical or aristocratic regime, since those regimes must be 
established over willing subjects, should be established by election, 
see Book 11, chapter 8 [14] of the Politics.'° 
283. Among all the types of tempered regimes monarchy is the best. 
But among the sub-types of this tempered regime, a monarchy that is 
established by consent without agreeing on the succession is to be 
preferred to one that is established by an agreement to a monarch and 
'© Genesis 10:8-9. 
"Tn fact Trier (French — Tréves) was named after the Treveri, the tribe that lived between 
the Moselle river and the Ardennes. Cusanus’ sources are the Gesta Trevirorum, a 
medieval history of Trier (printed in MGSS, vi, p. 130), and Otto of Freysing, 
Chronica, 1, 6-8 (Engl. trans. Charles C. Mierow, The Two Cities: A Chronicle of Universal 
History, New York, 1928). The poem is Ausonius, Mosella, about the river on which both 
Trier and Kues are located. 
'8 Marsilius, Defender, 1, 9, 2. 
'9 Marsilius, Defender, 1, 17, 2 and 1, 9, 4. 
210 


[PDF page 263]
Book Ill, para. 285 
his successors. In the latter type, many things occur that are often 
harmful to the commonwealth. For although illustrious, wise, and 
noble men, we read, often have been elected as kings together with 
their posterity to the sometime benefit of the commonwealth, never- 
theless, because as in the case of a fertile field the initial offspring of 
such men are of less quality than their parents’ natures and their 
successors are still less able, the illustrious qualities of the parents 
finally die out, as Aristotle says in Book 1, chapter 24 [15] of the 
Rhetoric. Hence although there are many good reasons for a heredi- 
tary monarchy, if the best man is always to rule the commonwealth by 
the will of all for the public good, the best method is to have a new 
election, by all or a majority or at least by those nobles who represent 
everyone with their consent.” 
284. This seems to be the opinion of Aristotle in the Politics, Book 1, 
chapter g [12] and Book ni, chapter 8 [11], and Book m, chapter 2 [4] 
and Book vu, chapters 9 [1m 15] and 12 [14]. It is the duty of the ruler 
to do nothing contrary to the laws. Indeed he ought to be subject to 
them, and their teaching should give life to the commonwealth as the 
heart does to the body. He should inflict punishment in accordance 
with the law in cases of serious crimes which give scandal to the 
commonwealth, although not for petty offenses or his rule will be the 
object of contempt. And so the prince, acting as its heart, must watch 
over the commonwealth continuously and assure the strictest 
observance of the laws. He should follow the laws, as Aristotle says in 
Book vu, chapter 6 [8] of the Politics, and for his kingdom to be more 
lasting he should not exercise his sovereign power frequently. 
Aristotle declares in the fifth book of the Politics [ch. 11] that 
Theopompus because he wished to make his kingdom last longer, 
rarely used his sovereign power and conformed to the laws and kept 
the love of the people.”! 
285. Three things are necessary for a ruler: First, devotion to the 
established constitutional order; second, power to carry out the chief 
tasks of government; and third, virtue and justice, as is said in Book v, 
chapter 4 [9] of the Politics. And “virtue” means the prudence which 
is the mistress of the virtues — see the last chapter of Book vi of the 
Ethics. But power is necessary in order to execute judicial [civil] 
sentences against the rebellious by coercive force. Hence the ruler 
20 Marsilius, Defender, 1, 9, 9; 1, 16, 11-17. 
21 Marsilius, Defender, 1, 16, 13; 1, 18, 2-5} 1, 15, 6. 
211 


[PDF page 264]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
should have an instrument appropriate for this — a well-equipped 
army. For Aristotle says in Book vu, chapter 6 [8] of the Politics, “It is 
necessary for those who are in association to have arms because of 
those who disobey the government,” and that power should be so 
great “that it is stronger than that of any individuals whether one or 
several together but weaker than the whole” — this is said in Book 1, 
chapter 9 [15] of the Politics. The army should be of intermediate size 
so that it does not appear to be tempted to dominate the monarch for 
its own advantage but nevertheless is powerful enough to overcome 
several or many rebels.” 
286. The punishment which the prince is obliged to impose should 
be compared to a medicinal remedy for the commonwealth as 
Aristotle teaches in Book 11 [11], chapter 3 [2] of the Ethics. The ruler 
should take special care to avoid great inequality among his subjects. 
Once balance is lost, the polity is destroyed by the disproportionate 
increase of some. ““The body is composed of many parts which should 
grow in due proportion for” health and “symmetry to remain — if this 
is not done the body will be destroyed if it increases disproportion- 
ately, not only in quantity but also in quality,” as Aristotle declares in 
Book v, chapter 2 [3] of the Politics, and in Book 1, chapter 7 [chs. 
12-13] of the same work.”* 
287. And so the ruler must exercise his power with great circum- 
spection, prudence, and experience in order usefully to nurse the 
ailing commonwealth with the medicinal punishments that are 
appropriate to the time and place as the situation demands. For 
example Aurelius Augustine tells us in his letter to Volusian that 
Vindicianus, an expert doctor, cured a young man of a certain illness 
by using a medicine intended for the young. After a time the young 
man grew older and fell ill with the same disease. He used the same 
medicine on his own which had restored him to health earlier but he 
did not improve. He asked Vindicianus the reason and he answered — 
“Tt did not cure you because Vindicianus did not prescribe it.”” When 
he was asked afterwards why he gave this reason for the fact that the 
medicine was ineffective, he said, “I said the right thing. If I had 
administered it, it would have helped him. But I would not have given 
an older man the same amount that I gave him earlier when he was 
young.”””* With this example Augustine teaches us that changes are 
a Marsilius, Defender, 1, 14, 8-10. 23 Marsilius, Defender, 1, 15, 10-11. 
*t Augustine, Ad Marcellinum, letter no. 138 (PL 33, p. 526). 
212 


[PDF page 265]
Book III, para. 290 
made in divine and human laws in accordance with the time for the 
same purpose. 
288. Venerable Sedulius [Scotus] in the tenth chapter of his little 
work, De Rectoribus Christianis [On Christian Rulers], describes the 
principal things that are necessary for a king in these lines — 
No structure keeps a fixed form for all time, 
If it does not rest on firm foundations, 
Neither can temples resplendent with light survive, 
Nor the hall of kings remain solid without these. 
The commonwealth asks of a gracious God, 
That it stand on the true foundations of just rule. 
The first supporting column shines with the brilliant gleam of 
truth, 
And the second is properly an enduring government. 
The third is to give generous rewards to merit, 
And the fourth to speak sweet soothing words. 
The fifth is to repress and attack evildoers with admirable zeal, 
And the sixth one is strong to celebrate the good. 
The seventh is to levy taxes with moderation on the people, 
But the eighth controls the scales of justice. 
The commonwealth endowed with these solid foundations shines 
forth, 
As the mount of Zion, and remains strong with these.”° 
289. More fine words by wise men could be quoted here if it were 
our purpose to discuss government at length. But besides what is said 
above, the most important requirement is that every ruler who is a 
faithful Christian should model himself on the figure of Christ whom 
he represents and succeeds. And so let him look to Christ who is truth 
itself. And let him consider first that he [Christ] is Lord and master, 
God and man, and thus every government is composed of human and 
divine elements. For all power is ordained of God — Romans 13. And 
Augustine is correct when he writes on the passage in chapter 19 of 
the Gospel of John, ““Thou wouldst not have any power over me, if it 
were not given from above,” that the power of Pilate over Christ also 
came from God.”° 
290. So also St. Bernard writing to the Archbishop of Sens says, 
“Christ declares that the power of the Roman ruler over him is 
5 Sedulius Scotus, On Christian Rulers and the Poems, tr. Edward G. Doyle, Binghamton, 
N.Y., 1983, p. 68. 
6PL, 35, pp. 1942ff. 
213 


[PDF page 266]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
ordained of heaven.””’ Therefore all rulership is sacred and spiritual 
and comes from God. Rulership also comes from man, just as Christ 
was the true son of the Virgin Mary. Hence Christ was born, God and 
man, of the uncorrupted and unstained Virgin by her own free con- 
sent when she said, “‘Be it done unto me according to thy word.”’* On 
this model true rule over the one uncorrupted church or congregation 
of men should result from the purest consent, not from violence, or 
ambition, or criminal simony, but from the purity with which Christ 
deigned to come into the world out of love for the salvation of the 
people. And when anyone is chosen and called by Christ the true gate, 
to be a ruler and accepts the example of Christ in humility and follows 
as prince in the footsteps of Christ, the commonwealth will necess- 
arily be governed in the best way and the name of the ruler will be 
remembered forever. For Christ was under the law. He came not to 
destroy the law but to fulfill it, meek and humble of heart, a most 
gentle healer. And it is only necessary for the ruler to follow in his 
footsteps for then he walks in the light of truth and will attain eternal 
life.?? 
291. ‘These words are sufficient now for this, since our principal 
intent in this work is directed toward determining the “Catholic 
Concordance.” Keeping to that principal purpose, let us investigate in 
order the things related to this. 
°7P_, 182, p. 832. The references to Augustine and Bernard are taken from Marsilius, 
Defender, il, 4, 12. 
8 Luke 1:38. 
2° Matthew 5:17 and 11:29; John 1:9 and 3:10ff. 
INTRODUCTION 
Thirdly, by way of a preamble, we should praise the outstanding 
qualities of our great and most pious Sigismund, here present, who 
has been crowned Emperor by the will of God. Like Augustus who 
refused the title of “lord” and like [the Byzantine Emperor] Basil 
whose virtues will be described later in his humility, he will forgive me 
if in my uncultivated style (which although it cannot explain trivial 
things is devoted to great, indeed enormous matters, without offering 
214 


[PDF page 267]
Book III, para. 292 
a true argument for the future where there has already been clarity) I 
sing the praises of the unconquerable living Caesar who rules over 
me, his humble servant. To presume to praise or please any prince 
while he is alive lends little credibility, especially when it comes from 
someone like myself of humble condition. 
And now, turning to our subject, we will direct our attention to the 
holy empire which is established among the Germans — concerning its 
power, preservation, and the concordance through which it is united 
with the holy priesthood in a Catholic way. And so, to begin this 
difficult subject, we should inquire about the structure of this holy 
empire, from whom it depends, and how it came to be among the 
Germans. It is appropriate therefore to investigate first: 
GEUAP AE Ret 
THE BASIS OF ALL LEGISLATION AND RULERSHIP 
AND ESPECIALLY THAT OF MONARCHS AND HOW IT 
[StS RENGOEEN EID DE GkvAP IE Re SEO Wis) ia Ag 
THE EMPEROR IS HEAD AND RULER OF ALL IN THE 
CORPORAL AIERAR CHY, LIKE LHe POP EOIN Ee 
SPIRITUAL HIERARGHY. 
292. The preceding collection has resolved many disputed ques- 
tions; it has demonstrated sufficiently that concord gives the greatest 
force to the ecclesiastical order; and it has noted this among the 
things that it has recommended as worth remembering. In particular 
[it has said] that the church of Christ is made up of sacraments, 
priesthood, and the faithful. The sacraments correspond to the spirit, 
the priesthood to the soul, and the rest of the faithful to the body, 
linked in harmony in the one church as a composite unit to the 
Mystical Body of the one Christ.’ Certain things have already been 
said above about the priesthood. In accordance with our intention, we 
will now speak of the body [of the faithful] which is organized in a 
graded hierarchical order up to the one Ruler of all, as anyone can 
easily understand, from the lowest of the simple laity who are like the 
"See Book 1, no. 47. 
215 


[PDF page 268]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
feet, through the governors, counts, marquesses, dukes, and kings, up 
to the emperor as the head. 
293. All things that come from God, are necessarily arranged in 
proper order. And so in this order in the Catholic church, there is one 
lord over the world who rules over the others in the fullness of power. 
He is normally said to be the equivalent in the temporal hierarchy of 
the Roman pontiff in the priestly hierarchy, always keeping in mind 
the difference between spirituals and temporals. I do not intend to go 
into detail regarding the similarities and differences in kind between 
the two powers, but I refer anyone concerned with this question to 
what is written above, and to this basic principle: he should recognize 
that His Imperial Majesty has the same legal power over all those 
subject to the empire that the Roman patriarch has over the bishops 
subject to the Roman church. And as the Roman patriarch is first 
among all the patriarchs, so the king of the Romans is first among all 
the kings. But compare the dukes to the archbishops, the counts to 
the bishops, and proceed with the rest as does the quotation from Leo 
IX that is contained at a certain point above.’ 
See Book 1, nos. 19-20. 
CSW IE INTE IRS 1 
THE PROPER YSORDEREDEPOWEHRYOR “PHEW ESE RN 
EMPEROR DOES NOT DEPEND ON THE POPE 
BECAUSE OF AIGIEFA BY CONSDAN TINE, AND DHAG 
FAMOUS DONATION IS APOCRYPHAL AS ARE 
CERTAIN OTHER DOGUMENTS AS WEL DHE DRWIE 
HISTORIES OF PEPIN AND CHARLEMAGNE ARE 
BRIEFLY ADDED IN ORDER TO DEMONSTRATE HOW 
THE ROMAN CHURCH FIRST ACQUIRED TEMPORAL 
POWER. 
294. The basic point that should be established first is that the holy 
empire itself comes from God. Next we ask whether or not it depends 
directly from him, and after this where it is located today, whether it 
was actually transferred by the pope from the Greeks to the Germans 
216 


[PDF page 269]
Book III, para. 296 
as represented by Charlemagne, and what power is exercised by the 
imperial electors. Since these questions have been treated at length in 
a variety of ways by many learned men in recent times, I would have 
preferred to remain silent. But there is one thing that I cannot pass 
over. Nearly everyone believes that there is no doubt that Emperor 
Constantine gave the Western Empire to the Roman pontiff Sylvester 
and his successors in perpetuity, and that therefore even if the argu- 
ment about the need for a single ruler — namely, that having two heads 
would be opposed to good order — were not convincing, it is evident 
that every emperor in the West must in justice recognize that his 
empire depends on the pope.' 
295. I have investigated this matter as far as I could, assuming that 
there was no doubt that Constantine had the power to make such a 
donation, although this question has not yet been resolved and prob- 
ably never will be. But in fact I wonder very much if it actually took 
place in this way since it does not appear in authentic books or 
approved histories. I have collected all the histories that I could find, 
the acts of the emperors and Roman pontiffs, the histories by St. 
Jerome who was very careful to include everything, those of 
Augustine, Ambrose, and the works of other learned men; | have 
reviewed the acts of the holy councils which took place after Nicaea 
and I find no confirmation of what is said about that donation. 
296. Pope St. Damasus is supposed to have recorded the acts and 
actions of his predecessors at the suggestion of blessed Jerome, and in 
his work the things that are usually said about Pope Sylvester do not 
appear.” In some of the histories we read that Constantine was bap- 
tized by Sylvester and that the emperor magnificently decorated the 
three churches of St. John, St. Peter, and St. Paul and gave them 
large annual incomes from different pieces of land in various prov- 
inces and islands for the support of the lamps, balsam, and incense 
and candles — all of which you will find specifically mentioned in the 
Liber Pontificalis.’ But nothing at all appears there concerning a grant 
of temporal dominion or the donation of the Western Empire. It is 
true that after Aistulfus, the king of the Lombards, occupied the 
'Nicholas was the first to appeal to historical sources to disprove the authenticity of the 
Donation. Lorenzo Valla’s more famous disproof seven years later was based on style 
and vocabulary. The reference to the adverse effects of two heads is probably from Pope 
Boniface VIII’s Bull, Unam sanctam (1302). 
HEFL seh joy, viel 
’ Liber pontificalis (ed. L. Duchesne), Xxx, pp. 170ff. 
217 


[PDF page 270]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
Exarchate of Ravenna and many other places and Pope Stephen II, a 
Roman by birth whose father’s name was Constantine, sent numerous 
legates to Aistulfus and asked him to return these territories to the 
empire and Aistulfus was unwilling to do so, Stephen visited Pepin 
and anointed him and his two sons as kings. Along with Stephen there 
was a representative of the emperor and they secured Pepin’s agree- 
ment to persuade Aistulfus to give back the lands to the empire. Pepin 
sent a request to him but without success. Therefore when he could 
not obtain the return of the lands from Aistulfus in this way, he 
promised Stephen that he would take them from him by force and 
give them to the see of St. Peter. When he had heard this, the 
representative of the emperor went back [to Constantinople]. Pepin 
carried out his promise. And the form of this gift is contained in the 
acts of the aforesaid Stephen, along with the specific names of all the 
territories.* 
297. Pope Zacharias transferred the rulership over the kingdom of 
France to Pepin after King Louis had been deposed, which one can 
read in [C.] 15 q. 6 [c. 3] Alus and in the gloss on the chapter 
Venerabilem [c. 34 of Decretals 1 6]. I think that this was why Pepin was 
favorably disposed to the Apostolic See. After this in the time of 
[Pope] Hadrian, King Desiderius again took those cities and some 
others. Pope Hadrian sent numerous legates to him to seek the 
restoration of the rights of [the see of] St. Peter but he could not 
obtain it. Then, at Hadrian’s request Charlemagne reconquered the 
lands and gave them back to [the see of] St. Peter in a solemn 
ceremony which is contained in the Acts of Pope Hadrian.° From this 
it is clear that Constantine did not give the pope the [temporal] rule 
over the Exarchate of Ravenna, the city of Rome, and the West. 
298. Hence we always read that the emperors up to that time and 
earlier had full legal rights over Rome, Ravenna, and the March along 
with the other territories in the West. The text, D. 96 [c. 1] Bene 
quidem proves this when it speaks of a patrician appointed in the name 
of King Odoacer etc.: see also D. 63 [c. 21] Agatho; D. 96 [c. 6] Cum 
ad verum and similar passages. 
299. And we read that the Roman pontiffs acknowledged the 
emperors as their overlords. For Pope Agatho writes to the Emperor 
Constantine who was emperor many years after Constantine I and 
* Liber pontificalis, pp. 440, 448, 452ff. 
> Liber pontificalis, pp. 492ff. 
218 


[PDF page 271]
Book III, para. 303 
called the Sixth Council, that the city of Rome was the “servant city” 
of that emperor.° And Pope Boniface I says to Emperor Honorius that 
as pope he is to rule the priesthood of the Roman church but the 
emperor rules over human affairs. And at the end he calls Rome “‘the 
city of His Majesty.” This text appears in D. 97 [c. 1] Ecclesiae. In 
conclusion, I have never read anything anywhere which contradicts 
the fact that the emperor remained in possession of the places listed 
above until the time of Pepin. 
300. And I have not read that any Roman pontiff claimed any legal 
right for [the see of] St. Peter over those areas up to the time of [Pope] 
Stephen II. I believe that this is true despite the famous opinion to the 
contrary which appears in the addition, Constantinus, appended to D. 
96 [c. 14], because if this section had not been apocryphal, Gratian 
would undoubtedly have found it in the old manuscripts and collec- 
tions of the canons. And because he did not find it, he did not include 
it. Hence whoever added it later inserted that invented story in this 
way as an additional title [Pa/ea], in the same way that many other 
extracts from apocryphal works appear. 
301. Also I have found this story in full in a certain book which 
contains much more than the passage in the selection in the Decretum, 
and examining it carefully, | have found clear evidence in the story 
itself that it was invented and is false, which it would be too long and 
unnecessary to insert here now. 
302. It is also to be noted that the text [c. 14] Constantinus of D. 96 
is taken from the legend of St. Sylvester and the one who put it into 
the Decretum bases the authority of that text upon the approval of Pope 
Gelasius in his synod. I ask, does Gelasius’ reference in D. 15 [c. 3] 
Sancta Romana seem to indicate approval? The passage is not persuas- 
ive since it says that the author of the text is unknown but that it is 
read by Catholics and therefore it may be read. Anyone can see what 
kind of approval that is. 
303. For there are many histories of St. Sylvester: one in which this 
[the Donation] does not appear which St. Damasus includes, another 
whose author is unknown which the text does not say is true but only 
that it may be read, and it does not say that the Donation is contained 
in it. Also the ancient decrees only have the text up to the passage, 
Item decreta Romanorum pontificorum inclusive, and thus that paragraph 
® Mansi 1, p. 291. 
219 


[PDF page 272]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
from the history of [St.] Sylvester is not found in those books. Also 
the Fifth Universal Council which listed the books of all the doctors 
and the writings which were approved, made no mention of those 
histories nor did the synod of Pope Martin which was held against 
Pyrrhus and Sergius who said that there was one will in Christ, when 
it confirmed the approved writings, as I have seen myself.’ Neither 
does anyone else that I have ever seen who is approved or named as 
true. 
304. Ihave read in the Histories of Vincent [of Beauvais], at the end 
of Book xx1v that, according to St. Jerome, Constantine cruelly killed 
his wife Fausta and his son Crispus, and, after being baptized at the 
end of his life by Eusebius, the bishop of Nicomedia, fell into the 
Arian heresy. And from this time, says Jerome, the pillaging of 
churches and discord in the whole world have continued down to the 
present time. These things clearly contradict the book of the Acts of 
Sylvester which Vincent says was translated from Greek by someone 
whose name he does not know, as appears in chapter go of the same 
book.* Who would not rather believe Jerome who is approved than the 
writings of an unknown author that are called apocryphal when the 
author is not known? 
305. Also the text that is ascribed to Pope Miltiades which appears 
in D. 21 q. 1 [c. 15] Futuram and seems to be somewhat opposed to 
this statement is not that of Pope Miltiades according to a certain 
gloss. The truth of the matter is that Miltiades preceded Sylvester as 
is clear from the list of Roman pontiffs. And if Constantine was 
baptized by Sylvester as is usually claimed, then it is evident that the 
title of that text is wrong when it speaks of the baptism of Constantine. 
And also if that were a text of Miltiades, there would still be no 
argument on that basis against what has been said above, since it only 
says that Constantine departed for Rome, the seat of the Empire, and 
granted it to Peter and his successors, that is, that the papal see would 
now be where the imperial seat had been — and no one denies this. 
306. And it is true that Constantine was emperor at the time of Pope 
Miltiades and was a Christian then, as Augustine says in many places 
and especially in his letter to Glorius, Elusius, Felicius, Grammaticus 
and others, which begins, “Dixit quidem apostolus.”” And this agrees 
with Jerome. 
7Mansi 10, pp. 863ff. 
*Vincent of Beauvais, Histories, ch. 13 (p. 102). 
AVAL, Bet, yeh, Tey) 
220 


[PDF page 273]
Book III, para. 31 
307. Also I have seen a decree of Pope Leo [VIII] in the Roman 
synod signed by the bishops and clergy and citizens of Rome in which 
Pope Leo gave back to Otto I all the territories given to [the see of] St. 
Peter by Kings Pepin and Charlemagne and Robert. And all the 
territories are named in the same decree and it makes no mention of 
the Donation of Constantine.'? Those stories about Constantine are 
apocryphal in my judgment as are also perhaps certain other lengthy 
writings attributed to St. Clement and Pope Anacletus upon which 
those who wish to exalt the Roman see more than is fitting or proper 
for the holy church, base their position almost completely. 
308. If anyone reads carefully through all the writings attributed to 
those saints and keeps in mind the time when they were written and 
then uses and remembers the works of all the holy fathers up to 
Augustine, Jerome, and Ambrose, as well as the acts of the councils 
where the authentic writings are listed, he will find it to be true that 
there is no mention in all these writings of those aforementioned 
letters. Furthermore if those letters are compared with the times 
when those saints lived they betray themselves as false. 
309. ‘The letters of Clement say that he was pope and successor of 
Peter, and the writer imagines that he sent them after the death of 
Peter to St. James who was the brother of the Lord and bishop of 
Jerusalem. Yet it is established that James died as a martyr eight years 
before the death of Peter. And this is one of the reasons why the 
epistles of James come first in the Bible, as Bede writes in the begin- 
ning of Super Canonicis Epistulis.'' The letters also say that Clement 
was the successor of Peter. And the same thing appears in other 
writings which are ascribed to St. Anacletus.'* How could St. Jerome, 
St. Augustine, Optatus of Milevis and others who composed the list of 
all the Roman pontiffs and did not include Clement not have known 
this, if they had also seen those same letters then or held them to be 
authentic? 
310. The distinction between bishops and priests is also mentioned 
in those letters. Jerome and Damasus say that this distinction arose in 
the church much later. From what has been quoted in these letters 
and innumerable other instances these things can be proved and it 
would be superfluous to put them down here. 
311. It should not be necessary to support the divine, praiseworthy, 
!° Pope Leo VIID’s decree is also apocryphal (see Jaffe, p. 3706). 
IDL, Cojeh ys 8.0) 
!2 Hinschius, pp. 66 and 75. The letters are spurious. 
221 


[PDF page 274]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
and most excellent first see of Rome with ambiguous arguments of 
this kind which were taken from those letters and inserted in the 
Decretum of Gratian. The truth would be derived more sufficiently 
and properly directly from the accepted, certain, and approved Holy 
Scriptures and writings of the doctors. Likewise, it [the papal see] 
should not argue that it is greater because of the Donation of Con- 
stantine. Even if it were established as certain, everyone knows it 
would not add any ecclesiastical power to the spiritual teaching func- 
tion of the church. And there still would be doubt as to its validity 
since Accursius in his commentary on the Authentica, [Novellae 6] 
Quomodo oportet episcopos after the beginning holds that it is not valid 
while Joannes Teutonicus writing on D. 63 [c. 30] Ego Ludovicus holds 
the contrary. See the gloss on the word Constantinus in the Clemen- 
tinae in the chapter beginning Romani of [11 9] De Jure Jurando. I only 
write what I have been able to find as true by diligent investigation, 
saving in all things the judgment of the sacred synod. 
312. And if all the writings discussed above are to be held as con- 
firmed by the acceptance of the church, I would also agree, for even 
without those writings every Catholic believes that the holy Roman 
church is the first see and the highest in power and excellence of all 
the sees. 
222 


[PDF page 275]
Book II, para. 313 
GisteWle Tas. ION 
THE EMPIRE WAS NEVER TRANSFERRED BY THE 
POPE FROM THE GREEKS TO THE GERMANS OR THE 
FRANKS, ALTHOUGH THEY [THE GERMANS AND 
FRANKS] ALSOSHAD THE TITLES OF IPADRIGIAN OF 
THE ROMANS OR EMPERORS. HENRY IV WAS CALLED 
PATRICIAN WHEN HE WAS CROWNED AT THE 
GENERAL COUNCIL OF BASEL. OTTO I WAS THE 
FIRST TO BE CREATED EMPEROR PROPERLY ALONG 
WITH HIS SUCCESSORS WITH FULL LEGAL RIGHTS 
BY DRA ESPEOPLE AND! THEICLERGY AND SYNOD OF 
ROMPES HISTORICAL REPERENCESTARE GCLLED ON 
DEVSTS UBIE CL: 
313. Still certain writers hold — and it is a very common opinion — 
that the empire was transferred by Hadrian to the person of 
Charlemagne, as Innocent III says in the chapter [c. 34] Venerabilem 
of |Decretals 1 6| De Electione. But I confess that I have never read this 
in the approved ancient books. It is true that [Pope] Stephen II 
anointed Pepin and his two sons as kings — but this did not involve 
transfer of the empire. It is also true that Charlemagne is called a 
Roman patrician in the legislation and the acts of [Pope] Hadrian. For 
after the cities and territories named in the acts of Stephen II became 
the legal property of [the see of] St. Peter because of the gift of Pepin, 
the father of Charlemagne, and more territory was added later 
because several cities put themselves under the legal jurisdiction of 
[the see of] St. Peter and their citizens cut their hair in the Roman 
fashion, there was a need for a patrician to defend all these territories. 
And Charlemagne was chosen as patrician, as appears in D. 63 [c. 22] 
Hadrianus and in the chapter [c. 23] /n synodo where he is called the 
king of France and of the Lombards. And as patrician, a term which 
was used because he was father [pater] of his country [patria], he held 
the office of earthly judge and was in charge of temporals while the 
pope did not involve himself in these matters. Rather according to the 
ancient gloss on the chapter [c. 22] Hadrianus of D. 63, as patrician he 
was the father of the pope in temporal matters, just as the pope was 
his father in spirituals. Isidore in the ninth book of the Etymologies says 


[PDF page 276]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
that patricians were so named because they provided for the com- 
monwealth as fathers provide for their sons.' 
314. And after they were crowned the emperors were usually called 
patricians, as we read concerning Henry IV at his coronation in A.D. 
1061. For when [Pope] Nicholas II died, the Romans sent the crown 
to him and asked him about the election of the pope. After he had 
called many bishops of Italy together and held a general meeting at 
Basel and was crowned, he received the title of patrician of the 
Romans. At Basel with the common consent of all and by election of 
the representatives of the Romans, Chadelus, the bishop of Parma, 
was declared pope on the 26th of October, and took the name of 
Honorius. But Anselm, a certain bishop of Lucca, a city in Tuscany, 
had been elected 27 days earlier by certain Roman and Norman 
bishops, and he occupied the see until his death. Hildebrand suc- 
ceeded him, who was called [Pope] Gregory VII and excommunicated 
Emperor Henry. 
315. Therefore the present council of Basel is taking place in 1433, 
372 years after the earlier council at Basel and now His Most Serene 
Majesty Sigismund, crowned at Rome by [Pope] Eugene with the 
imperial diadem, is present at the council as Henry was then and as 
were other Catholic emperors. It is now precisely 500 years since 
Henry I, the father of Otto I, built that city of Basel which means the 
royal city and endowed it with churches, after Augusta Magna which 
was located not far distant had been totally destroyed by the 
Hungarians. Let us not speak further on this. 
316. Returning to our main argument — granted what has been said 
about Charlemagne being called patrician, it does not follow that 
therefore the empire was transferred to him from the Greeks. Rather 
it is very clear from the acts of the Eighth Council of Constantinople, 
and also after that down to the time of Otto I, that the Roman pontiffs 
Nicholas I and Hadrian II recognized Basil who had convened that 
council as well as his sons and Leo after that as the Roman emperors. 
And we do not find in those true histories that Charlemagne is called 
“emperor,” but “king” and “patrician of the Romans,” although 
certain histories would have it that at the end of his life as it were, he 
received the title of “Augustus” from the Roman people? and also 
‘Isidore, Etymologies, 1x, 13 (PL 82, p. 345). For the Latin text with a Spanish translation, 
see Isidoro de Sevilla, Etimologias, Madrid, 1982-1983. 
*Einhard’s biography of Charlemagne (Engl. trans., The Life of Charlemagne, London, 
1970) says that he was called emperor from the time of his crowning in A.D. 800. 
224 


[PDF page 277]
Book II, para. 319 
after his death he was sometimes called emperor, as in D. 15 q. 6 [c. 
3] Altus. For I have seen a large volume in the Cathedral of Cologne 
containing all the letters of [Pope] Hadrian I to Charlemagne and 
Charlemagne’s answers to him and also copies of all the [papal] bulls 
and I confess that I have never read of that transfer.? 
317. Nevertheless I read that the term, empire, was very common in 
antiquity. For the one who was chosen by the army was called 
emperor [imperator], as St. Jerome says in D. 93 [c. 24] Legimus. 
Especially in the histories the kings of Italy are called emperors and 
also I have read that Berengar was called emperor as well as many 
others. Also Louis the Pious, the king of France, is called emperor in 
D. 63 [c. 30] Ego Ludovicus, and in D. 4 in the chapter [9] De capitulis 
it is proved that Lothar was called emperor and pontiff, and the same 
is evidently true of Louis in the same place. And if we summarize all 
these examples, those who exercised rule [imperare], particularly in 
Italy, were customarily called emperors or kings. 
318. We also know that after the death of King Conrad the line of 
succession of kings from Pepin and Charlemagne was ended, and that 
at the direction and urging of Conrad himself, already on his death- 
bed, Henry, the duke of Saxony, was elected king and the royal 
insignia of Conrad were conferred upon him. And we know further 
that the kingship went by succession to Otto I, I, and II and that at 
the time of Henry and Otto I, there were great divisions and wars in 
Italy and elsewhere, and that now this one, now that one, now Arnulf, 
then Berengar, and then Hugo, then Alberic waged wars among 
themselves. For King Hugo had Rome and other neighboring regions 
under his control for a long time and then when he had been expelled, 
Alberic occupied the city of Rome. 
319. And whoever reads the history dedicated to Raymond, bishop 
of Elvira in the province of Spain which was written by Liutprand, 
deacon of the church of Pavia who was in the chancery of Berengar, 
can see many similar things, since he wrote clearly and accurately 
about what took place from the time of the Emperor Basil, Constan- 
tine his son, and his [Constantine’s] son Leo, and from Charles the 
Bald [Bold] to Otto I. What he wrote is true since he was present at 
the time of many of these complex events.* 
3The Codex Carolinus now in the Vienna Library (Kallen, DCC, p. 340). 
*Liutprand of Cremona, Antapodosis (trans. by F. A. Wright, New York, 1930) is 
Cusanus’ source for these and later passages on the German empire in the tenth 
century. 
AS 


[PDF page 278]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
320. In summary then, from the time of Henry I, and especially 
through Otto I, the Germans acquired control by force of arms over 
the kingdom of Italy and the city of Rome, the kingdom of Arles, and 
that of Germany itself. For this reason their rulers were called 
emperors, after Berengar, Hugo, Arnulf, and Alberic, and others of 
the time of Otto I had died. And IJ have not found that from the time 
of [Popes] Stephen II or Hadrian that the city [of Rome] ever with- 
drew from the empire or was taken away from Pepin or Charles, 
although well after this until [the reign of] Otto many tyrants occupied 
it until Otto defeated them and freed it from their control. And for 
this reason, he is called emperor and king in the text [c. 23] /n synodo 
of D. 63 and to emphasize the special status of the king the synod 
declares that no one may use the title, patrician, unless he is the king 
just as it has made Odoacer a patrician because he was the king, see 
D. 96 [c. 1] Bene quidam. For a patrician is father of the pope in 
temporal matters, as discussed above. 
321. And note that the synodal decree in D. 63 [c. 23] /n synodo was 
adopted by the clergy and people of Rome and the Roman people 
transferred their power to the emperor in such a way that they still 
retained superiority over him as the Cardinal [Zabarella] notes under 
the heading De aere concerning the chapter Venerabilem [of Decretals 
6]. For, [he says], today there still exists in the church of the Lateran 
in Rome the bronze tablet on which the senate and people of Rome 
explicitly set down the power that they gave to Vespasian. What was 
granted to Vespasian is contained in the Lateran church. This is also 
proved by the statement of Hostiensis in his Summa [Aurea] discus- 
sing [Decretals 1 2| De Constitutionibus, in the paragraph Quis possit at 
the words /tem populus, where he says that the statement in [Justinian’s 
Code 1 17]| De veteri jure enucleando, law 1, paragraph [7] Et hoc, which 
asserts that the people transferred their power to the emperor means 
that they granted it with the provision that they retained for them- 
selves the power to revoke it, as law 2, paragraph [16] Exactis in [the 
Digest 1 2| De Origine Iuris and what follows prove. 
322. Therefore since he had been made the victorious king of the 
Romans and was their liberator and since the Romans were not being 
protected by the Greek emperor who then lived at Constantinople, 
they gave their consent that Otto should be emperor. The power to 
direct the empire comes from the consent of the Romans, as will be 
shown below. And therefore after Otto was called in to expel the 
226 


[PDF page 279]
Book III, para. 324 
tyrant and was made king of the Romans and this had been confirmed 
by the consent of the synod, clergy, and people, at that time he and his 
successors acquired the imperial power deservedly and legitimately. 
323. But it would be too long to describe how the rulership over the 
city of Rome and Italy was acquired by force of arms by Otto in 
accordance with the desire of the Romans. And I am very surprised 
that Gratian when he speaks of the investiture of bishops in D. 63 [c. 
23] /n synoda — a text which proves that Otto was king of Italy and of 
the Germans — did not mention that he returned the cities to the pope 
that had once been given to the Roman church by the kings of France. 
And because he was the ruler of the city of Rome and Italy, Otto was 
named emperor along with all his successors, although the govern- 
ment of the city of Rome and of the cities once donated by Pepin and 
Charlemagne and by other kings later, see D. 63 [c. 30] Ego Ludovicus, 
was given back to the Roman pontiff. And there is no doubt that when 
they (the emperors) returned those territories to the church, they kept 
some power over them for themselves, and this is why they are 
described with the title of emperor in addition to that of king, on the 
model of the ancients, just as Charlemagne was once called patrician 
and is called the protector in the chapter [c. 34] Venerabilem of 
[Decretals 1 6| De Electione. For if the emperor did not have power over 
the men subject to the church how could he constrain them by force 
to obey the laws of St. Peter? And how could he preserve the rights of 
St. Peter for the Apostolic See as he swears to do in D. 63 [c. 33] 7ib 
domino? 
324. But for now I do not want to continue on these matters for they 
are not relevant to the present discussion. Suffice it to have touched 
on the above. 
227 


[PDF page 280]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
GHAR DER LY 
THE ELECTORS DO NOT DEPEND ON THE ROMAN 
PONTIFF. THEY ARE NOT CREATED BY HIM NOR DO 
THEY HAVE THEIR POWER FROM HIM BUT FROM 
THE COMMON CONSENT OF ALL THOSE SUBJECT TO 
DHE EMPIRE WHOSHAVE THE POWER 7 O  ESDTABEISH 
AN EMPEROR OVER THEMSELVES, NOT FROM 
POSITIVE LAW BUT FROM DIVINE AND HUMAN LAW. 
It TS RIGHD AND YUST THAT LHE EMPIRESSHOMED 
DERIVE ITS POWER, PROM ELEC TIONG Yar 
WITHOUT PAPAL CONFIRMATION, AND THEY [THE 
EMPERORS| GANNOT BEODEP OSE DEB Y  DhE: Orr 
ALONE. 
325. We must discuss further the electors of the empire mentioned 
in the chapter [c. 34] Venerabilem of [Decretals 1 6] De Electione. The 
jurists hold that they act as electors in the name of the Roman people, 
on which see Joannes Andreae in his Additiones to the section [1 1] De 
Rescripti Praesentiatione of the Speculum Juris (of Gulielmus 
Durandus), the last word beginning /tem quod obtentum.! As is said in a 
certain place above every well-ordered empire or kingdom is based on 
election, and then the ruler is truly considered to have been appointed 
by the providence of God. Thus Emperors Valentinian and Marcian 
when they write to Pope Leo on convening the synod, say, “The 
victorious and august Valentinian and Marcian in glorious triumph, to 
Leo, most reverend Archbishop of the glorious city of Rome: We have 
attained this most high rule by the providence of the true God and the 
election of the most excellent senate and the whole army.’ 
326. Note that it says, “by the election of the senate and army.” 
Following this procedure, Henry I, the father of Otto, we read, was 
established by election as king at the command of King Conrad while 
he was still duke of Saxony and became the first king of the Germans. 
But his son, Otto, received from the synod and Roman people the 
power to choose a successor, as the text already mentioned, /n synodo, 
of D. 63 [c. 23] says, although according to the gloss [on that pass- 
'The manuscript of Joannes Andreae’s Additiones is in the library at Kues (no. 269). 
2PL 54, p. 899. 
228 


[PDF page 281]
Book III, para. 330 
age], he received this [only] for the kingdom of Italy, and the suc- 
cession was maintained following that procedure down to Otto III. 
327. After his death, Henry II, the son of the brother of Otto III, 
was chosen and this emperor with the consent of the nobles and 
leaders of both estates, the clergy, and the people, established perma- 
nent electors who would carry out the election, acting for all. This was 
done at the time of [Pope] Gregory V, who was a German and a 
relative of an earlier Otto. We should not therefore admit that the 
electors have their power of election from the Roman pontiff, so that 
if he does not agree they cannot act, or if he wishes to do so he can 
take that power away from them. 
328. Who, I ask, gave the Roman people the right to elect the 
emperor, if not divine and natural law? For in every kind of govern- 
ment rulers are chosen for their positions in a harmonious rightful 
and holy fashion through voluntary subjection and consent. For all 
violence is opposed to law. There is a general agreement among men 
to obey kings, see D. 8 [c. 2] Quae contra mores, sentence beginning 
Generale, and the final law [1. 7] of the Code [of Justinian, 11 13] De 
Jurisdictione omnium judicum and [see also] the Digest, Quod cuiusque 
universitatis, law 1, para. 2. 
329. In chapter 75 of the Council of Toledo in the year of Our 
Lord, 581, at the time of King Sisenandus, it was decided that when 
the king died the leaders of the people along with the priests were to 
establish his successor with the common counsel of the kingdom so 
that retaining the bond of unity no dissension in the country or people 
would arise because of ambition. A decree is added that a tyrant who 
has wrongly usurped authority should be excommunicated; and ter- 
rible anathemas and maledictions are imposed.* 
330. Thus kings are in Greek called ‘“‘Basilic’” since as bases they 
support the people in a collective harmony, and this is why bases have 
crowns. ‘““Tyrants” in Greek are the same as “kings” in Latin; for 
“tyro” means “‘strong,” and a tyrant is a strong king. Subsequently it 
became customary to call the worst and most dishonorable kings — 
those who loved luxury and exercised cruel dominion over the people 
— tyrants, as Isidore says in Book Ix of his Etymologies.* They are called 
tyrants as usurpers of authority who are neither asked to rule nor 
elected. 
*Fourth Council of Toledo — A.D. 671 (Mansi 10, pp. 638-639). 
Isidore, Etymologies, 1X, 3 (PL 82, p. 344). 
229 


[PDF page 282]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
331. Summarizing what has been said above, all legitimate authority 
arises from elective concordance and free submission. There is in the 
people a divine seed by virtue of their common equal birth and the 
equal natural rights of all men so that all authority — which comes 
from God as does man himself — is recognized as divine when it arises 
from the common consent of the subjects. One who is established in 
authority as representative of the will of all may be called a public or 
common person, the father of all, ruling without haughtiness or pride, 
in a lawful and legitimately established government. While recogniz- 
ing himself as the creature, as it were, of all his subjects as a collec- 
tivity, let him act as their father as individuals. This is that divinely 
ordained marital state of spiritual union based on a lasting harmony 
by which a commonwealth is best guided in the fullness of peace 
toward the goal of eternal bliss. Since the bases of this divine and 
human law have been shown above, | will not repeat the discussion 
here. 
332. It is sufficient to know that free election based on natural and 
divine law does not originate from positive law nor from any man 
upon whose will the validity of the election depends. This is particu- 
larly true of the election of a king or emperor whose existence and 
power do not depend on any one man. Thus the electors — who were 
created at the time of Henry IJ by common agreement of all the 
Germans and the other subjects of the empire — derive their basic 
authority fundamentally from the common consent of all those who 
could by natural law have created the Emperor [and] not from the 
Roman Pontiff who has no authority to give any region in the world a 
king or emperor without its consent. 
333. Gregory V gave his consent to this arrangement but only by 
virtue of his position as pontiff of Rome who has the right to partici- 
pate in accordance with his rank in expressing his consent to the 
common emperor. So also in universal councils, the pontiff as the one 
in the first rank rightly participates in consenting, along with all the 
others attending the same council. The force of the decree depends, 
however, not on his consent as chief pontiff of all, but on the common 
consent of all, both the pope and the others. The fact that in setting 
up a king or emperor the consent of priests as well as of laymen must 
be obtained is not because the kings have the right to rule the priest- 
hood for we know that the priesthood is like the sun and the empire 
the moon, as is said in the chapter [c. 16] Solitae, of [Decretals 1 33] De 
230 


[PDF page 283]
Book III, para. 336 
majoritate et Oboedientia, but because the temporal possessions of the 
church without which the priesthood cannot survive in this perishable 
life are subject to the empire and its laws, as Augustine says in D. 8 
[c. 1] Quo Jure and [c] 23 9. 7 [c. 1] Quicumque. 
334. The one responsible for the protection of the interests of the 
priesthood ought to participate in consenting to the election of the 
king. Therefore this is of particular concern to the Roman pontiff who 
bears the chief responsibility for the priesthood. Thus I believe that in 
fact at the beginning the Roman pontiff consented to the arrangement 
whereby these electors were established. The latter carry out the 
election by virtue of a general delegation of authority from all those 
who are under imperial authority including the entire priesthood and 
the Roman pontiff. There is no doubt that the one who is elected 
receives full power by virtue of that election, as Joannes [Teutonicus] 
notes in his gloss on D. 93 [c. 24] Legimus and [Pope] Innocent [II]] 
says in the chapter [c. 34] Venerabilem of |Decretals, Liber Sextus 1 6| De 
Electione and this is established, as Hostiensis notes in [Liber Sextus, V 
40] De Verborum Significatione, the chapter [c. 26] Super Quibusdam, as 
does the gloss on the word reges and the chapter [c. 1] Romani [De jure 
jurande|\ in the Clementine decretals [11 g De jure jurande|. The reason 
is that having been elected he has received the submission of all and 
therefore he has the power to command which is the essence of 
imperial rule. 
335. The emperors originally derived their title from commanding 
|imperandi| the army. The anointing and coronation which, we read, is 
also accorded to other rulers does not prove that the pope has the 
power to confirm or annul the emperor’s election, nor does it 
demonstrate his supremacy over the empire in temporal affairs; just as 
nothing of that sort is involved in the anointing of the king of France 
at Rheims or in the coronation of the emperor himself by the Arch- 
bishop of Cologne at Aachen. This is clear from the fact that Otto I 
was invested as king of Germany and of the Franks by Hildebert, 
Archbishop of Mainz, at Aachen by the wish and consent of the rulers 
and all the people of Germany, Saxony, and France. We also read that 
at the death of King Conrad, Henry I was anointed and crowned by 
Herger, the Archbishop of Mainz, with the consent of all, and that 
when he received the diadem he was unwilling to be anointed since he 
said he was unworthy. 
336. ‘Thus it is clear that anointment and coronation in no way add 
231 


[PDF page 284]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
to imperial authority; for these insignia are added to the ceremonies 
as a way of symbolizing to the visible material subjects of the empire 
the sacred majesty that is inherent in the emperor as signs of the 
reverence with which his power is to be regarded. We know that 
similar ceremonies are carried out in the case of the Roman pontiff, 
and yet immediately after his election and before they take place he 
becomes pope. The title is changed when the pope crowns the 
emperor — he is called king beforehand and emperor afterwards — but 
this is no proof that previously he had less governing power, and this 
is well known. And so when he had full power to rule, he was really 
emperor even if he did not carry the title. However this title is 
reserved for this solemn occasion, so that the ruler may desire to be 
crowned. 
337. On the coronation with the imperial diadem and other 
ceremonies, see the gloss on the word vestigiis in Romani in the 
Clementine Decretals [11 9 De jure jurande|. As Isidore says in Book 1x 
of the Etymologies, at a time when army commanders were using the 
title, imperator, the senate decreed that this should be the name of 
Augustus Caesar alone and that this name should distinguish him 
from rulers of other nations. Accordingly, the Caesars have to this day 
assumed this name for themselves, particularly from the time when 
they are crowned with a diadem by the bishop of the Romans from 
whom |i.e. the Romans] the Roman power to rule [imperium] is 
derived. 
338. Since this matter has been discussed quite eloquently by many 
writers, it may be sufficient for us to recognize that our imperial 
electors, when they elect the emperor by virtue of the united common 
consent of all who are under the empire, do this because all have 
agreed to transfer their power to them — and that agreement included 
the Roman pontiff, Gregory V. It follows that the emperor is created 
by election without confirmation by anyone — just as in electing a 
pope, the universal authority of the church is rightly transferred to the 
cardinals by the common consent, tacit or sometimes express, of all, 
and therefore the pope is elected without confirmation by anyone. 
339. Just as elective authority is given by agreement to certain rulers 
in the two estates so, since an equivalent authority should have the 
right to take away this power, I do not believe that the Roman pontiff 
alone can withdraw this power from those princes but when the 
consent of both the Roman pontiff and of all the others concurs, there 
232 


[PDF page 285]
Book III, para. 340 
is no doubt that this power can be taken away from them. It is the 
common opinion of all the experts on the subject that the Roman 
people can take the power to make laws away from the emperor 
because he derives his power from the people.” Thus we read that 
when the Roman people, ruled for a long time by kings, could no 
longer endure their haughtiness, they created annual rulerships and 
two consuls, and also dictators and other arrangements that seemed to 
suit their governmental needs at the time. 
°There continued to be disagreement among the Roman lawyers as to whether the 
transfer of power described in Justinian’s Code (1, 17 De veteri jure) was revocable or not, 
i.e., whether power had been conceded (concessio) or transferred (translatio) by the people 
to the emperor. 
CHAPTER V 
DAE EMPEROR RE GED ESasU PREM E. BARD riley PO Wee R 
PROM GIELRITS di AUNiO AGA SiASii LS RE P7RIE.S BANG AGE TaVii 
DAEPRELOREV AE IS GALLE D RHE MINISTER OP "GOD 
ANDI THE VIGAR OF GHRIST FOLEOWING THE 
EXAMPDESOF iGERIST UN His RULE OVER ATI: 
NATIONS. 
340. Following in order we should discuss the concordant arrange- 
ment that is proper to the empire. First, we assume something that is 
generally accepted — that by its nature the imperial majesty is 
independent, first in rank and supreme, and distinct from the spiritual 
power of the priesthood, see D. 96 [c. 10] Duo sunt, and that it is 
derived directly from God, see D. 97 [c. 1] Ecclesiae meae, and is over 
everyone, see [C.] 7 q. 1 [c. 41] J” apibus; [C] 11 q. 1 [after c. 36] 
para. Hic [Haec] si quis at the word volumus. He [the emperor] is the 
prince and ruler of this world and all things are in his power, see 
D. 13 [D. 8] [c. 1] Quo jure; [(C] 24 [23] q. 8 [c. 21] Convenior; [and] 
D. 63 [c. 30] Ego Ludovicus. The pope is not superior to him with 
respect to those imperial rights, see [C.] 23 q. 1 [c. 7] Jn summa; [C.] 
2 q. 7 [c. 41] Nos si; and D. g [D. 10] [c. 9] De capitulis. And what has 
been written above argues for this as do D. 96 [c. 6] Cum ad verum, 
and many singular passages in which he was honored by the pope and 
233 


[PDF page 286]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
the council, see [D.] 63 [c. 2] Hadrianus II and the chapters /n synodo 
[c. 23] and Reatina [c. 16]. Also the pope often calls him his lord and 
honors him as such, see D. 97 [c. 1] Ecclesiae meae, as was clear in the 
case of Pope Agatho when he wrote to Constantine [III] that after 
God he was the common father of all in the Authentica |Novellae 98] at 
the end of collection 8 [c. 2], Neque virum quod ex dote est. 
341. Many legal provisions as well as other writings could be 
quoted. But it is his high privilege that he is the minister of God, as 
Paul says in Romans 13, and he acts as the vicar of Jesus Christ on 
earth as Pope Anastasius says writing to the emperor, “Your merciful 
heart is a sanctuary of the public good. Thanks to you whom God has 
commanded to act as his vicar on earth, unyielding pride does not 
resist the evangelical and apostolic commands, and the precepts of 
salvation are obeyed.’’! Note that the Christian emperor by virtue of 
his rulership is the vicar of Christ, the King of kings and Lord of 
lords. 
342. Hence just as Christ is king of kings so all kings have some- 
thing of the divine in their governing power and therefore reverence 
and obedience are due them. But when they order something contrary 
to a divine commandment it is evident that the command does not 
share in the divine rulership, and so one should not obey it, see [C.] 
11 q. 3 [c. 94] Julianus with the other texts located there and D. ro in 
its entirety. And so he [the emperor] is first over all other princes 
because he rules in subordination to Christ, victorious and trium- 
phant, and subjects himself by faith to Christ and his laws. Therefore 
the Christian empire is higher than all other governments because it is 
the one closest to God. 
'Hinschius, p. 654. 
234 


[PDF page 287]
Book III, para. 344 
CHAPTER Vi 
DHE? OWPERIOPR THE SPMPIREVEXTENDS TO) THE 
UNSREETANS ly EU AG PACR Byars) Bes Cale O)liainge AUN DM@ i Beyealais 
ALTHOUGH THE ROMAN EMPIRE NEVER INCLUDED 
CERTAIN PROVINCES AND KINGDOMS NAMED IN 
DES TE EAP AE Ree iit SEMPER OR SUS GyAle eR DED Hibs lO RID 
OR THE, WORT eB E CAUSES Es RWIe BS. i Eras ARG R 
PART OF Uist SaRG EE ORSEHUMs TOR AW Es DEVE 
HUGHES DPOSIION ORVALLORULERSSBE GAUSS Eee 
MOST NEARLY RESEMBLES CHRIST WHO REIGNS 
THROUGH FATT AH: 
343. We should note that his power to command does not extend 
beyond the territorial limits of the empire under him, as is evident in 
the text [D. 63 c. 30], Ego Ludovicus, where although Louis describes 
himself as emperor, he issues commands only to the inhabitants of the 
kingdom of France and the Lombards who were his de facto subjects. 
And following this we should say that the emperor is said to be lord of 
the world as ruler of the empire that the Romans once conquered by 
their valor, as the text [C.] 28 q. 1 para. Ex hiis says, deriving that title 
from the fact that the Romans had the greater part of the world under 
their rule. They did not rule all of it for they did not gain control of 
the Caspian Mountains and the gates of Alexander in northern 
Scythia, and Norway, and the areas beyond the Caspian Sea and the 
Himalayan Mountains, and the Kingdom of China, as well as the 
Persian desert towards India and the East, Arachosia [Pakistan] and 
the parts of India located beyond the Indus and Ganges Rivers, and 
Ceylon, the largest island of all, and southern Arabia beyond the 
Persian Gulf towards the Indian Ocean, and the region of the 
Troglodytes, and Nubia, a very large area, and others located beyond 
the great desert of Libya and Mauritania. 
344. These regions, it appears to me from the Cosmography of 
Claudius Ptolemy,'! make up no small part of the world — in fact, 
almost half of the inhabitable land. India alone is said to contain nine 
thousand walled villages. Scythia also has a very large population 
'See Elwood Luther Stevenson (trans. and ed.), The Geography of Claudius Ptolemy, New 
York, 1932. 


[PDF page 288]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
although it does not have cities. Nubia and the regions of the 
Troglodytes which are beyond the circle of the solstice where 
shadows are cast in both directions [at different times of the year], and 
the island of Ceylon are not so heavily populated because of the 
extreme heat nor are Norway and the outer parts of Scythia because 
of the cold, but there are great kingdoms there. 
345. The Troglodyte region contains the empire of the Negus John 
whom we call Prester John who is said to be a Christian and a most 
faithful deacon with seventy kingdoms subject to him.’ But I think 
that those kingdoms are not very populous or large. 
346. But no part of the world is as heavily populated as Europe in 
proportion to its size since it is not one fourth as large as Asia nor half 
as large as Africa. It starts at Constantinople and extends to Cadiz 
near the Pillars of Hercules [Gibraltar] beyond Spain. The city of 
Rome is situated in its western part so that it is called the Western 
Roman Empire and is said to be over the whole world because the 
nations subject to it include the majority of mankind. 
347. But now we see what has become of that famed empire. And so 
we should say that if the Romans had a legal right to their monarchy 
in the way described, the emperor to whom their power has been 
transferred is lord of the world by legal right. However if rulership is 
only rightly possessed through the elective agreement of the subjects 
as argued above, then he is only lord over those who are actually 
subject to him and we should conclude that the emperor is lord of that 
part of the world over which he exercises effective authority. 
*On the Troglodytes and the mythical Kingdom of Prester John, believed to be located in 
Ethiopia, see Vesevolod Slessarov, Prester John, The Letter and the Legend, Minneapolis, 
1959. Nicholas writes on the basis of a spurious letter from Prester John supposedly 
written to the Byzantine emperor in the twelfth century. For the texts see Edward 
Ullendorf and C. F. Beckingham (trans. and eds.), The Hebrew Letters of Prester John, 
Oxford, 1982. 
236 


[PDF page 289]
Book III, para. 349 
CASUAMIPADIEIR WAN 
RHE HIGHES D RESPONSI BIE DIDY EN DUST ED) iO) svete, 
EMPEROR SE HA Ti BY VIRTUE OF WHhlGH iE Ss OWE 
DELEON Sa— aloe bl Se ROl EaASsGiUARD TANG Oat EVE 
ORTHO DOxXIRADL HH, EbalS WEEE OAR NEES 
SPE REO Pith ORE BE GAWS Hed) HE Py AIG: HT EUASS 
BEENTENDTRUSTED! TO) BEIM AS TiS GUARDIAN IN DHE 
SANE WAYS TAGE WSS TU DY TANI TAGE LN Gr AGRE 
ENDRUSTED TO THE PRIESTHOOD. HE AGQUIRES 
THIS HIGHEST POWER BY THE ELE GTION OF 
CHRISTIANS. 
348. But as the Imperial Excellence is constituted king of all in a 
way similar to and approximating the rule of God over all we believe 
that there are gradations in excellence according to [the ruler’s] close- 
ness to, or distance from God, and that the one who in his public rule 
resembles God least is least worthy while the one who resembles him 
most is the greatest. Thus a king of the Tartars is the least worthy 
because he governs through laws least in agreement with those 
divinely instituted; a king who belongs to the Mohammedan sect is 
greater since he venerates the laws of the Old Testament and certain 
of those of the New Testament; and a Christian king is the greatest 
because he accepts both the laws of nature and those of the Old and 
New Testaments and the orthodox faith. And according to the 
standard of holiness of rule, I maintain that the authority of the 
empire is the greatest. For every king and emperor holds public office 
for the public good. The public good consists in peace, the goal 
towards which justice and just wars are directed. But the foundation 
of peace is to direct subjects to their eternal end, and the means to 
reach that end are the holy precepts of religion. Hence the first duty 
of the emperor is to observe them. 
349. Thus we read that the pagan emperors were called supreme 
pontiffs because of the care which they took for religion. If therefore 
this is the chief concern of rulership and all others are subservient to 
this, there is no doubt that our Christian empire outranks the others, 
just as our most holy and pure Christian religion is highest in holiness 
and truth. And as every king and prince should care for his kingdom 
237 


[PDF page 290]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
as noted above, so the emperor should care for the whole Christian 
people. And just as the Roman pontiff is responsible for the faith and 
whatever is related to it first in his bishopric, then in his 
metropolitanate, after that in his patriarchate, and finally in the 
universal church, so the emperor exercises his responsibility of 
guardianship first over those immediately subject to the empire, after 
that over those subject to him through the princes directly under him, 
and then over those subject through kings and princes not properly 
under him who claim parallel places for themselves but recognize him 
as first of all.’ 
350. Hence just as the prince who is the administrator of a province 
in temporal matters is responsible for carrying out the decisions on 
worship and religion and the welfare of the commonwealth that are 
adopted in provincial councils, and the king exercises the same func- 
tion for the councils of the kingdom — which earlier were usually 
called universal councils of [several] provinces — so the emperor acts 
to enforce whatever is decided in the universal council of the whole 
Catholic church. And every ruler must give an accounting of the 
responsibility that he has to protect the church of Christ, see [C.] 23 
q. 5 [c. 20] Dicat and the chapters Regum [c. 23] and Omnes principes 
levees 
351. In this way the emperor is called the protector [advocatus]| of 
the universal church because of the responsibility which he has as 
guardian of the orthodox faith for the protection of [church] laws. 
Thus we read that Marcian was called the guardian of the faith in the 
Council of Chalcedon. And the Emperor Basil at the beginning of the 
Eighth Universal Council says that a most beneficent Divine Provi- 
dence has committed the direction of the whole ship of faith to him.’ 
For as the teaching responsibility to define and legislate on what 
pertains to the orthodox universal Christian faith is entrusted to the 
priesthood by God, so to govern, to confirm, and preserve what is 
commanded by God through the priesthood is entrusted to the holy 
empire. 
352. The first Christian emperor was Philip — who ruled for a short 
'The issue of the relation of the European kings to the Holy Roman Emperor was already 
raised by Pope Innocent III in the thirteenth century when in Per venerabilem he observed 
that the king of France recognizes no superior in temporal matters. 
> Mansi 7, p. 171 and 16, p. 18. 
238 


[PDF page 291]
Book III, para. 355 
time with little in the way of positive results.’ Emperor Constantine 
gave permission for churches to be built throughout the world and 
after him all the emperors were baptized, although some departed 
from the faith — as did Constantine himself according to [St.] Jerome, 
as well as Julian the Apostate, and Constantius. However I do not 
base the imperial duty to act as universal guardian of the faith on that 
succession of believing emperors but upon the basic transfer of power 
from the Christian Roman people. 
353. I mean by the Roman people, the whole Christian people just 
as when Emperor Marcian said in the Council of Chalcedon that what 
had been defined by the Council would be useful to the Roman 
people,* he meant by the Roman people all Christians, since all those 
who were then subject to the empire were Christians. Hence once the 
Roman people became Christian, they chose as their rulers emperors 
of the same faith as the people. Therefore I believe that it is true, as is 
stated in chapter [34] Venerabilem of [Decretals 1 6| De electione, that it is 
the intention of the people only to transfer power to a ruler if he has 
the faith, so that a heretic may not receive power over the empire by 
election, and if the pope who is the chief of the bishops of the faith 
should find that the one who was elected is in error as to the faith, he 
could declare that he was not emperor. 
354. Nevertheless I do not deny that the rule of succession also 
operates in this case so that when we read in many synods that the 
responsibility for protecting the faith was assigned to the emperors 
named, it was also given to their successors. For this reason I find the 
following acclamation in praise of Marcian expressed by the Council 
of Chalcedon: “Everlasting remembrance to the new Constantine.” 
And the Eighth Synod said to Basil, “Everlasting remembrance to the 
new Marcian, the new Constantine.” And this method may be used 
to analyze the true bases of the supremacy of the Christian empire 
over all empires and of the emperor himself over all Christian kings 
and princes. 
355. Because he is the guardian of the universal faith and the 
protector of universal [church] statutes which could not be effectively 
$Philip the Arabian, emperor between 244 and 249. Orosius, History against the Pagans, 
claims that he was the first Christian emperor, but modern historians are dubious. 
*Mansi 7, pp. 107ff. 
* Mansi 7, p. 134 and 16, p. 143. 
239 


[PDF page 292]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
executed without [one] ruler over all, and since the universal statutes 
respecting the Catholic faith bind all faithful Christians to maintain 
and apply them, all are subject to the emperor’s rule insofar as he is 
established to maintain those directives. 
356. And therefore I believe that if the emperor should add some 
laws to assure the observance of these holy definitions of faith, as did 
Justinian, Marcian, and the other emperors, they would bind just as 
universally as the originals, although the other laws would perhaps not 
bind those who as a matter of fact or of exemption do not recognize 
the supremacy of the empire. 
CSW PICT WAU 
EAYMEN SHOULD SPEAK AT COUNCILS WHEN DHEY 
MUST DEFEND. THEMSELVES BUT OTHERWISE THEY 
Si OU DOIN Yee LS aisINe wb RANI CoE Ses kOe CrAuly Ie 
GOUNCILS IN AREAS UNDER THEIR RULE IN ORDER 
TO PUNISH CRIMES AND CARRY OUT REFORMS. THE 
Bea MP EE VO PG ECAR EVE AG IN Eel Sm GinVaaiING 
357- Relative to what has been said above, the following questions 
should be considered: First, what are the powers of laymen in 
councils made up of priests? Second, what is found in the records on 
the role of the emperor in universal councils? After that something 
will be added on the usefulness of an imperial council to represent all 
those subject to the emperor. And finally some thoughts will be 
developed about the reform of the empire. It has already been noted 
that laymen invited to a universal synod are present to listen and they 
sign the acts of the council as witnesses.! 
358. There is no doubt that laymen may be accused [of crimes] in a 
parish synod and that they ought to be admitted to defend themselves, 
as the Council of Mainz decrees.” But laymen should not be present 
in synods where ordinary canonical matters are discussed and 
examined because it is not proper for them to observe what often 
happens among priests, as the universal council says above — unless, 
'Book um, nos. 138-139. * Mansi 25, p. 308. 
240 


[PDF page 293]
Book II, para. 359 
as we read in the sixth chapter of the Council of Chalons, and in 
chapter 119 of the Council of Carthage they are invited to be present. 
But princes can be present when general matters involving their rule 
are treated, although not when cases involving the clergy are dis- 
cussed.* Even then they should be auditors as we read in the records 
of innumerable councils, many of which, we read, were convened at 
their [the princes’] request. 
359. We read of King Charlemagne [that he spoke] as follows: “I 
Charlemagne, leader and prince of the Franks on the 22nd of April of 
the year of our Lord 752 with the counsel of the servants of God and 
my nobles, have convened the bishops and priests of my kingdom, 
including Boniface, Archbishop of Mainz and Burchard of Worms in 
council and synod to advise me as to how the law of God and the 
ecclesiastical religion may be restored. With the advice of my priests 
and nobles we have ordained bishops in the cities and have 
established Boniface, the legate of St. Peter, over them.” And below, 
“We have commanded that a synod be convened every year in order 
that the decrees of the canons and the rights of the church may be 
restored to us present and the Christian religion may be purified, and 
we have now returned the money to the churches which was their 
endowment and cut off church funds from, and degraded and 
punished false priests, as well as deacons and clerics who are 
adulterers and fornicators.” And below, “Following the canons of the 
saints we have decreed that every priest must be subject to the bishop 
in whose diocese he lives and every Lent he must give an accounting 
for his ministry regarding baptisms and the [preaching of the] 
Catholic faith and prayers and the order of masses. When the bishop 
goes about his diocese administering Confirmation to the people, the 
priest should always be prepared to receive the bishop with the 
assistance and aid of the people who are to be confirmed. In conform- 
ity with the canonical decree we have commanded that bishops and 
priests from wherever they come are not to be admitted to the 
ecclesiastical ministry without the approval of the synod. Likewise we 
have decreed that any of the servants or handmaids of Christ who has 
fallen into the crime of fornication shall do penance in prison on 
bread and water. And if he is a priest, let him stay two years in prison 
and let him be beaten and racked beforehand. But if he is a cleric [in 
>Mansi ro, p. 1191 (Chalons) and 3, p. 959 (Fourth Council of Carthage). 
241 


[PDF page 294]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
minor orders] or a monk, after three beatings let him stay a year in 
prison. Likewise also the veiled nuns should suffer the same punish- 
ment and all the hair of their heads should be shaved off.”* 
360. Another synod which Charlemagne attended adopted a law 
against fornicators which provided that they should be punished by 
being deprived of their benefices and forced to do penance and 
transferred to a different place and many other provisions.’ Pope 
Zacharias writes about this synod to Archbishop Boniface in two 
letters, one of which begins, Susceptis and the other, Suscipientes 
sanctissime.° 
361. Note that the king convenes the council and along with the 
others commands that what is just should be done. Would that today 
princes would make a similar effort to remove the public evils and 
vices which are a great scandal to religion, such as fornication com- 
mitted by those who have taken a vow of chastity. In this respect 
special concern should be given to the protection of nuns. For St. 
Boniface writes to Ethelbald, King of the Angles, that the Greeks and 
Romans considered it blasphemy against God if anyone was guilty of 
sleeping with a nun.’ 
*Mansi 12, p. 365. > Mansi 12, p. 369. 
® Jaffe, pp. 2264 and 2271. ™MG Epistolae, pp. 146ff. 
GE AYP TEEAReIEX 
SAINT GREGORY EXHORTED THEODORIC, THE KING 
OF THE PRANKS, 10) CALETA GOUNCIE OF AIS 
BISHOPS AND TO ELIMINATE CONCUBINAGE AND 
SIMONY FROM HIS KINGDOM. OTHER EXAMPLES 
ARE GIVEN FROM THE REIGN OF RECAREDUS, THE 
KING OF SPAIN AND GAUL. KINGS SHOULD 
ENFORCE WHAT IS DECIDED BY COMMON CONSENT 
IN THOSE GOUN GIES. 
362. And so kings and princes should make an effort to convene 
synods as St. Gregory advised Theodoric, the King of the Franks, in 
the [Papal] Register, chapter 273: ““Again we exhort Your Grace to 
command that a council be convened and, as we have written before, 
242 


[PDF page 295]
Book IIT, para. 365 
to have the bodily vices of priests and the heretical crime of simony 
condemned by decision of all the bishops and eliminated from the 
territorial limits of your kingdom.”! 
363. Also the exarch or prince either personally or through a 
council ought to urge the adoption of what is required to assure the 
peace of the church, see [C.] 23 q. 4 [c. 48] Sicut. And it would be too 
long and unnecessary to describe the princely councils that have been 
held by the Frankish kings in the Gauls and Germanies at Aachen, 
Cologne, Koblenz, Mainz and in other places. Everyone is aware with 
what zealous concern those holy princes secured the public good and 
the true and pure religion. Nowhere can the common good of the 
public be commanded and ordained better than in holy assemblies in 
which everything is decided in concord. 
364. Itis the office of princes to enforce and protect what has been 
decided in the councils. Hence we read that Recaredus, the king of 
Gaul and Spain issued the following decree: ‘““The most glorious lord 
Recaredus, king of all subject to the rule of our authority: Divine truth 
which makes us solicitous of your good has inspired us to command 
all the bishops of Spain to appear at our throne in order to restore 
faith and discipline to the church. Proceeding with careful delibera- 
tion they have acted with maturity and intelligence concerning what is 
useful to the faith and the improvement of morals. Therefore we in 
our authority command all men belonging to our kingdom that no one 
is to ignore or dare to violate what had been defined by this holy 
Council of Toledo in the fourth happy year of our reign. The chapters 
pleasing to us and appropriate as a rule which have been set down by 
the present synod are to be observed with full authority by the clergy 
and all men — and let the earlier canons continue to be observed.” 
365. And below: “We have decreed that all the church laws which 
we have discussed in brief summary form, and which are contained in 
full in the canon, are to remain fixed forever. Therefore if any cleric 
or layman refuses to obey these commands — if he is a bishop, priest, 
deacon, or cleric, let him be subject to excommunication by the whole 
council, but if he is a layman and person of honorable estate, let him 
surrender half of his property to the treasury, and if he is a person of 
lesser estate let him be exiled, and his goods confiscated.’”” I could 
quote many similar statements but it is not necessary. And so it is to 
IPL 77, p. 1179. 
? The Third Council of Toledo — A.D. 589 (Mansi 9, pp. ggoff). 
243 


[PDF page 296]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
be noted that kings and princes should preserve, confirm, and execute 
the acts of the councils as is commanded in these canons. 
GEAR TE Rex 
KINGS TN DEP REN GES INDE RV ENED SAM a ELOISE 
COUNCILS WITH REVERENCE AND DEVOTION AND 
ISSUED MOST SWEET EXHORTATIONS. WE NOTE 
EEE ECAC MiP IE Oi Se KoUN: Ga ROB GAGE DIELS eer AUN) a Cilia le: 
EXAMPLES OF KINGS SISENANDUS AND 
CHINTALANUS ON THE SAME POIND. 
366. Kings and princes should approach those councils, addressing 
them mildly, reverently and humbly with sweet exhortations. We read 
this of the [King]: Recaredus in another Council of Toledo. When 
that most glorious prince acting out of sincere faith commanded all 
the bishops of his kingdom to come together, he addressed the 
council as follows: “I suppose that it is not unknown to you, most 
reverend priests, that I have called you to our serene presence for the 
purpose of restoring discipline in the church. And because in times 
past heresy threatened the whole Catholic church and prevented 
conciliar business from being carried out, God who has been pleased 
to use us to remove the obstacle which this heresy posed has com- 
manded us to reestablish the institutions of ecclesiastical practice. 
Therefore let there be joy and gladness among you that at God’s 
prompting and to our glory, ecclesiastical practice is being returned to 
the forms of the fathers. I likewise advise and exhort you first to pay 
attention to fasts, vigils, and prayers so that the canonical order which 
forgetfulness has long removed from the consciences of priests and 
which our age claims it does not know, may by divine gift again be 
evident to you.” At this the whole council began to cry out in praise, 
giving thanks to God and to the most glorious prince. 
367. A three-day fast was then proclaimed. And on the eighth day 
of May when the priests of God were gathered together and after a 
prayer each priest was sitting in his proper place, the most serene 
prince who was present among them, after sharing in prayer with the 
priests of God and filled with divine inspiration, arose and spoke as 
244 


[PDF page 297]
Book III, para. 369 
follows: “We know that your holinesses are aware how long Spain 
suffered from the Arian heresy. When not many days after the death 
of our father your holinesses recognized us as members of the holy 
Catholic faith, we know that everywhere there was great and lasting 
rejoicing. This is why, most venerable fathers, we have called you to 
carry out this council.” 
368. And below, “Although Almighty God has granted to us to 
ascend the throne for the benefit of the inhabitants of the kingdom 
and has committed the government of no few peoples to our royal 
care, we remember that we are subject to the mortal condition and 
that we cannot merit the happiness of future beatitude if we do not 
venerate the true faith and please our Maker through the saving belief 
which is his due. Therefore as much as we are superior to our 
subjects in royal glory, so much more should we be solicitous of the 
things of God so that we may both attain our hope and provide for the 
people entrusted to us by God. But how are we worthy to give 
anything in return for the many benefits of Divine Omnipotence, 
when all things are his and none of our goods would be lacking to 
him, unless we confess that we believe in him with total devotion as 
the Holy Scriptures say he should be known and believed.” 
369. And below, “Therefore most holy fathers, I offer these most 
noble nations which have been granted to us by the grace of the Lord, 
to the eternal God as a holy and pleasing sacrifice in our hands. For I 
will have an everlasting crown and the joy of the reward of the just if 
the peoples who have returned to the unity of the church by our 
efforts remain firm in the same faith. For as by divine intention it was 
our responsibility to draw them back to the unity of the church of 
Christ, so may it be your teaching responsibility to instill in them 
Catholic dogmas so that instructed in the knowledge of the truth they 
may be able wholly to reject pernicious error, to keep to the path of 
the true faith in charity, and to embrace the communion of the 
Catholic church with an intense desire. But as I am confident that 
pardon will easily be granted for the fact that, out of ignorance, this 
great nation was in error, so I do not doubt that it will be very serious 
if it doubts the truth which it has recognized and turns its eyes away — 
which God forbid — from its powerful light. Therefore I have con- 
sidered it especially necessary for your holinesses to come together 
since I have faith in the saying of the Lord, ‘Where two or three are 
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.’ For I 
245 


[PDF page 298]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
believe that the Blessed Trinity is present in this council and there- 
fore I confess my faith before you as one in the presence of God.”! 
370. Let all kings learn from this to venerate the holy councils, to 
encourage them to meet, and to show humility in exhorting the holy 
bishops. Let the holy bishops learn to support kings for through a 
good king the church of Christ increases in proportion to his power. 
371. I will add still another example, that of King Sisenandus. 
When prompted by the zealous love of Christ and devotion of the 
most devout king of Gaul and Spain, Sisenandus, the priests had met 
in the city of Toledo in the year 581 and the assembly was gathered in 
the basilica of the holy martyr Leocadia, the king himself with a 
magnificent and noble retinue entered to demonstrate his faith. After 
first prostrating himself on the ground in front of the priests of God, 
with tears and sighs he begged them to intercede with the Lord for 
him. Then with religious concern he urged the synod to be mindful of 
the decrees of the Fathers and to devote its efforts to affirming the 
rights of the church and correcting abuses which had developed 
through neglect and had permitted the usurpation of the rights of 
ecclesiastics. At the end of that council — which [St.] Isidore attended 
— the bishops said, “Glory and honor to Almighty God in whose name 
we have been gathered together. After this, peace, salvation, and a 
long reign to our most pious and devout lord, King Sisenandus, 
because of whose devotion we have been convened to adopt this 
salutary decree. May the glory of Christ strengthen his reign and 
protect him to the end of his old age by the grace of the Most High 
God. And after the glory of this present kingdom may he pass to the 
eternal kingdom and reign forever who rules so well on earth with the 
aid of the one who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords.’” 
372. Similarly we read that King Chintilanus together with the 
nobles and elders of the palace entered another council at Toledo as a 
suppliant commending himself to the prayers of the priests and that 
with holy exhortation he compelled his subjects to do the same. By 
divine inspiration he published a law which the council decreed at his 
command that three days of prayer should be observed from the 
thirteenth of December throughout his whole kingdom.? 
373. Know this now, o kings! Learn from these examples, you who 
'The Third Council of Toledo — A.D. 589 (Mansi 9, pp. 977ff). 
* The Fourth Council of Toledo — A.D. 633 (Mansi 10, pp. 614 and 641). 
> The Fifth Council of Toledo — A.D. 636 (Mansi ro, p. 653). 
246 


[PDF page 299]
Book III, para. 374 
judge on earth. For God is thus to be served in fear and praised with 
trembling. Kings have always had the custom of choosing some out- 
standing famous men of the past to follow. Follow the examples 
described above on the way to hold councils and you will live happily. 
CHEAP TE Re 
TEIN G TS OBLT GED DOUINCGREAS ES DEE EVA iEL 
AN DEDEV OTON ORS EISeSUBIE GES SEE Ee AMP Bets 
GIVENTOF THE? EAGHING OER Sis iGREGORY io 
HMI-PPERT LAP SKIING OP DHE PRANKS THE, GHUR GE 
iS PN ERSTE D TOURING S, AND? THE YSARE, OBLIGED 
EO GLVESANSACG COUNDING OF THAT DRUS i: 
374. And therefore note the words with which Pope St. Gregory 
exhorts Hilpert [Ethelbert] king of the Franks [English] chapter 264, 
where he says, “Almighty God appoints good men to govern nations 
so that through them the gifts of his power may be given to all those in 
authority. We see that this has been done in the case of the nation of 
the English over which you rule in your glory so that the graces that 
have been granted to you may also by the gift of heaven be shared with 
the nation under you. And therefore, glorious son, preserve carefully 
the divine grace which you have received; strive to spread the 
Christian faith among the peoples subject to you; increase your 
earnest zeal for their conversion; attack the worship of idols and 
destroy the houses of worship of the pagans; promote the moral 
conduct of your subjects exhorting them to great purity of life, instil- 
ling fear in them, correcting them, and providing examples of good 
works so that you will find that the One whose name you spread on 
earth will reward you in heaven. For he whose honor you seek to 
preserve among the nations will also glorify your name among your 
successors. Because the most pious Emperor Constantine turned the 
Roman commonwealth to Almighty God away from the perverse 
worship of idols and subordinated himself and the commonwealth to 
Our Lord Jesus Christ and together with the peoples subject to him 
was converted with all his heart to God, he outdid all the rulers of 
antiquity in renown, and surpassed his predecessors in reputation and 
247 


[PDF page 300]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
good works. And now may Your Grace strive to spread the knowledge 
of the one God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, among the kings and 
people subject to you so that you too may surpass the earlier kings of 
your nation in merit and praise, and may be saved from your own sins 
in the terrible judgment of Almighty God in proportion as you have 
eliminated those of others who are your subjects.” 
375. This is the duty of a king — to spread the Catholic faith among 
his subjects and thus to win a glorious name. St. Isidore speaks this 
way and other words of his are contained in [C.] 23 q. 5 [c. 20]. The 
conclusion to which he comes is that God is the author of royal power 
and often permits a king to abuse that power because of the faults of 
the people. The king in his power receives from the true God the 
responsibility for the holy church entrusted to him, for which he is 
obliged to render an account because all are bound by the laws of 
faith. The king should not think that he is freed from the laws,’ for if a 
law is just it is binding and not otherwise, and therefore it also binds 
the king himself who is obliged to rule justly. 
'Pope Gregory I to Ethelbert, King of England (PL 77, p. 120). 
* 4 reference to the Roman law statement (Digest, 1, 3, De legibus) that “the prince is freed 
from the laws.” 
CHAPTER XII 
THE KING OR PRINCE SHOULD ADOPT LAWS AND 
GENERAL STATUTES WHICH APPEGT DHE PROVINCE 
WITED THE GONSEND OP GENERAL GC OUNGILS OF 
BOTH ES GALES OP HS SIN:GD OM AND =— Ex Gr Pt 
FOR HIS POWER OF DISPENSATION — OBSERVE AND 
DEPEND THEM) WIth THEAG REE MENT OR HS 
UNIVERSAL COUNCIL, HESS HOWL DT HAV E AyD AlDY: 
COUNCIL MADE UP OF THOSE CHOSEN FROM THE 
WHOLE PROVINCE SUBJEG TO URIIM: 
376. In summary the main point to be understood is that it should 
be the aim of the ruler to establish laws by agreement. It is, therefore, 
fitting that all general laws affecting the commonwealth should be 
adopted and ordained in a council of primates and rulers of both [the 
248 


[PDF page 301]
Book III, para. 378 
spiritual and temporal] estates. And the king should execute what is 
enacted with the agreement of the council, since this constitutional 
arrangement is the way in which the subjects wish the authority of the 
king to be limited. No one doubts that a universal council that acts by 
agreement of the head and members functions as a limit on the power 
of the executive [presidentialem| for the good of the commonwealth. It 
is true that in accordance with the principle of equity, if there are 
doubtful cases the king, acting for the public good and for the fur- 
therance of justice, may dispense from, or interpret a law even though 
it has been established as described above. However this should be 
understood in the way that we have already described when we dis- 
cussed the relation of the Roman pontiff to the canons: it does not 
mean that without action by the council the king can abolish a law 
which it has enacted, but that he has the right to declare that the spirit 
of a law does not apply in a particular case. It is sufficient to know that 
the function of the king in conciliar gatherings is to support, exhort, 
and confirm, and to obey and enforce ecclesiastical legislation on faith 
and divine worship. 
377. In matters related to the public welfare he must decide and act 
in the manner accurately described above when we spoke of the 
metropolitan as one who, as the head of his council, can only decide 
matters affecting the whole province with the consent of his suffra- 
gans. For the king ought to preside over a council in which matters 
pertaining to the government of the commonwealth are discussed; 
and he ought to decide each matter by consent, with the counsel of 
the nobles and bishops subject to him. 
378. For this purpose the ruler should have the best qualified of his 
subjects chosen from all parts of the realm to participate in a daily 
council with him. These counsellors ought to represent all the 
inhabitants of the realm, in the same way as was described above 
concerning the cardinals who assist the Roman pontiff. These coun- 
sellors ought constantly to defend the good of the public which they 
represent, giving advice and serving as the appropriate means through 
which the king can govern and influence his subjects and the subjects 
on proper occasions can influence him in return. The great strength 
of the kingdom comes from this daily council. The counsellors should 
be appointed to this task by agreement in a general meeting of the 
kingdom, and they should be publicly bound legally by oath to speak 
out openly for the public good. Since St. Thomas, Aegidius 
249 


[PDF page 302]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
Romanus, Sedulius Scotus, and before them Plato, and Cicero, 
(although the books of these last are not available) and also many 
others have left many volumes to us concerning the government of the 
commonwealth, everyone may refer to these works for the rest. 
379. Next we should consider what the records show about the role 
of the emperor in the universal council of the Catholic Church. 
GEAR NEAR eT 
THE EMPEROR IN ASSEMBLING, SUPPORTING, AND 
ODPHE RWS Beau TIN Ga Ee Gi OWN Gil mea Cale SatlIN| sie btib) 
UNIVERSAL COUN GIL OF THEW HOLE CAw EOL LC 
CHURGH IN THE SAME WAY AS DOES THE KING 
WITHIN HIS KINGDOM. HOW AND WHEN THE 
EMPEROR WAS ACCUSTOMED 10 GALE DHOSE 
UNIVERSES COMN GHEE S SL NVEP:ORACAIN TD SE XeAgV OPIS SOs) 
OTHERSEMPERORS TARE. OU OF) DAG TENG Ee TIN 
ORDER TO ANSWER THOSE MODERNS WHO HAVE 
SHENG DEW OF tit. OLDE RIRE GORD Ss: 
380. From earlier chapters we know that the emperor always con- 
vened the holy meetings of the universal councils of the whole church. 
I have found this to be true after perusing the records of all the 
universal councils up to and including the Eighth Council held at the 
time of [the Emperor] Basil. Thus in the Fifth Action of the Eighth 
Council we read that the most worthy priest, Elias, secretary of the 
see of Jerusalem, said to all those assembled, “Know that in the past it 
was the emperors who convened the councils. They brought together 
representatives from the whole world to settle matters in this way. 
Following their example our most religious emperor has convened 
this universal council.” And I have read in the commentary on this 
statement by Anastasius, the librarian of the Holy See who translated 
the records of that synod from the Greek, that it had been customary 
for the emperors to convene universal councils from the whole world. 
We never read however that they convened local synods.* And the 
'Mansi 16, p. 78. * See Book 11, no. 94. 
250 


[PDF page 303]
Book III, para. 383 
canonical decree by the same council which was quoted earlier that 
says that the prince, i.e., the emperor, ought to be present at the 
universal council and not at others, is in agreement with this. 
381. Hence I repeat briefly what I said above, that the emperor acts 
in relation to the universal council of the Catholic Church as does the 
king in relation to the universal council of his kingdom. He should not 
convene it by force but by persuasion, as the letter of the Synod of 
Aquileia meeting at the time of St. Ambrose by decree of Emperors 
Theodosius and Valentinian states: “All are called by the princes, but 
no one is invited under compulsion.”* But it was customary for the 
emperors through imperial decrees to remind the patriarchal sees of 
the need for a council, to establish the time and place of meeting, and 
to guarantee freedom and protection against oppression and intimida- 
tion, in accordance with the conditions laid down above for a council. 
382. And the decisions and decrees of the council do not derive 
their strength from being convened in this way but from the agree- 
ment of all to come to that meeting and from the participation and 
presence of those who are called — which is also discussed above. For 
when there is a general threat to the faith or something disturbs the 
universal church of Christ, then the emperor as guardian both of the 
faith and of the peace should take care first of all to suggest the need 
for a council to the Roman pontiff and to secure his consent to the 
calling of the council in a particular place, following the example of 
Emperors Valentinian and Marcian when they wrote as follows to 
Pope Leo: “For the sake of the holy Catholic religion and the 
Christian faith which, we believe, guides and strengthens our govern- 
ment, we believe that Your Holiness who possesses the primacy 
among the bishops of the faith of God should say what is proper in 
sacred letters at the outset. To strengthen the condition of our empire 
we invite and urge you to entreat the Eternal God that it may be our 
purpose and desire through the celebration of a council under your 
direction to remove all impious error and to maintain the greatest part 
of all the bishops of the Catholic faith pure and unsullied by sin.’”* 
383. Similarly we read that other emperors always invited the pope 
and the other patriarchs and all the bishops to hold a universal 
council. For we read that Emperor Marcian wrote as follows to Pope 
Leo: ‘“‘Marcian to Leo, the most reverend bishop of the church of the 
* Mansi 3, p. 615. *Mansi 6, p. 94; PL 54, p. 899. 
251 


[PDF page 304]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
city of Rome: Your Holiness must be aware from our zealous prayer 
that we wish the true Christian religion and apostolic faith to remain 
strong and to be observed with piety by all the people. Further we do 
not doubt that our concern should be with our true religion and the 
worship of Our Saviour. Therefore we have received with joy and a 
properly grateful heart the most reverend men whom Your Holiness 
has sent to us. It is not necessary to say that if it should please Your 
Holiness to come to these parts and hold a council, to do this would 
greatly aid religion. May Your Holiness satisfy your desires and 
decide what is useful for the holy religion. But if it is too difficult to 
come to these parts, Your Holiness should tell us this in your letters 
so that we may send official letters throughout the East and to Thrace 
itself and Illyria, [decreeing] that all the most holy bishops should 
meet at a certain specific location as it shall please us in order to make 
a formal declaration as to what is good for the Christian religion and 
the Catholic faith, as Your Holiness has determined in accordance 
with church law.’” 
384. Also Emperor Constantine HI [IV] who convened the Sixth 
Council in the year of Our Lord 686 or thereabouts wrote as follows 
to Pope Agatho: “The faithful Emperor Flavius Constantine to the 
most holy and blessed lord archbishop of old Rome: Your Paternal 
Blessedness and your many churches in old Rome have known that 
from the moment that God commanded us to rule as prince, certain 
men have wished to create a disturbance due to a verbal disagreement 
over religious dogma, involving groups both in your holy church and 
in this holy church of almighty God. However we have prohibited this 
as inopportune since we knew that particular disagreements not only 
cause disunity but lead to greater evils.” 
385. And below: “The truth of God is precious and according to 
the word of the Lord, ‘He who wishes to be first over all, let him be 
minister to all.’ And again it is said, “Let all men know that you are my 
disciples from this, that you love one another.’ Therefore when the 
circumstances indicate that a full council can take place we exhort 
Your Paternal Blessedness by this holy letter to send worthy and 
modest men who by God’s inspiration have full knowledge of all 
doctrine and are learned in dogma, to represent your Apostolic See 
> Mansi 6, p. 98: PL 54, pp. 903-905. 
252 


[PDF page 305]
Book II, para. 388 
and council. They should bring the books which should be produced 
and they should possess authorization to meet with the most holy and 
blessed patriarch of this city, and with Macharios, the most holy 
patriarch of Theopolis, that is the city of Antioch, and search through 
them in all mildness and modesty. By the grace of the Holy Spirit they 
will find and consent to the truth. This present letter will serve as 
formal notification to those who come here from your see. By 
almighty God we swear that we do not favor either party but we will 
maintain absolute impartiality toward both parties and require 
nothing in the way of a decision from those who are sent by you, but 
we will honor them and give them a splendid and worthy reception. 
And if both sides agree, then it will be well. But if they do not, we will 
send them back to you in all humanity, excusing ourselves from 
further action before the judgment of God who established us to 
preserve the holy and spotless faith which we have received, for which 
we will render a full and proper account before the holy and terrible 
divine tribunal. For we can invite and urge a settlement and the 
unification of all Christians but we do not wish to impose 
compulsion.” 
386. “But let the persons be decided who will be sent by Your 
Paternal Blessedness. And so from your holy church, if it seems 
appropriate to do so, three persons may suffice but if it sends more — 
let it send as many as it desires. The council may send up to twelve 
metropolitan bishops. But from the four Byzantine monasteries four 
monks may come from each one. For if time permitted, we would 
have striven to establish a plenary council.” 
387. And below, “But God has advanced our council that we were 
delaying at this time. For all these reasons we bid Your Paternal 
Blessedness to place no impediment in the way of the will of God, but 
to send your representatives. For we hope that God who in his mercy 
has wished that this matter be discussed, now will grant that through 
the Holy Spirit the truth may shine forth and all may be enlightened 
and abandon division or contention.” 
388. And below: “We have commanded Theodore, the most 
glorious patrician and exarch of our province of Italy, beloved of 
Christ, to provide ships and expenses to all those coming and every- 
thing useful to them including, if required, armed galleys for their 
protection so that they may come to us, with God’s cooperation, 
253 


[PDF page 306]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
unharmed and free of danger. May God preserve you for many years, 
most holy and blessed father.’”° 
389. This letter which was translated by the most eloquent Leo of 
Sicily, Pope of Rome, [Leo II] who was learned in both the Greek and 
Latin languages, is found at the beginning of the Sixth Council with 
many important provisions. Note especially that the emperor should 
propose the appropriate time for a holy council and should call it in all 
reverence, and guarantee full liberty and complete impartiality to 
those who come. And we read likewise that other emperors wrote the 
bishops in the same way in their sacred letters. 
390. ‘Thus the aforesaid Emperors Valentinian and Marcian wrote 
as follows: “We think that what tends to the true faith and orthodox 
Christianity should be preferred above other things.” And below: 
“Hence let Your Holiness with whatever reverend bishops you have 
approved who are over the holy churches under you, accompanied by 
experts in the Holy Scripture and orthodox doctrine and the true 
faith, and eminent before all, hasten to come to the city of Nicaea on 
the first day of September next. For anyone who refuses a universal 
council which will be useful for the whole world, commits a sin and 
offends against our imperial majesty. And Your Holiness should know 
that we in our devotion will be present at that council unless some 
unavoidable public responsibilities require us to be away.’”” 
391. The letter speaks of Nicaea because Valentinian directed the 
council to that city but later it was transferred to Chalcedon. Hence 
the same emperors wrote to those gathered in Nicaea, “It is our desire 
that decrees be issued concerning the holy orthodox religion so that 
all doubt may be ended and genuine peace may return to the holy 
Catholic churches. We think that this should take precedence over 
everything else. Because therefore we wish to be present at the holy 
council but necessary public concerns keep us away, let Your 
Holinesses [lit. - Religion] not think it serious that our presence is 
delayed, but pray that with God’s help we may settle the things which 
we have at hand and come there so that decisions may be made in our 
presence which will end all dissension and questioning and confirm 
the true and venerable orthodox faith.” 
392. After this the same emperors wrote that the representatives of 
Pope Leo strongly wished them to be present at the council. And 
® Mansi 11, pp. 195-202. 7 Mansi 6, pp. 55 rff. 
254 


[PDF page 307]
Book ITI, para. 394 
because the requirements of their office made it easier to participate 
in Chalcedon than in Nicaea, they wrote as follows: “Therefore if 
Your Holinesses agree, please come to the city of Chalcedon.” And 
because their safety was in doubt because of Eutyches, they sent to 
the emperors who were in Thrace indicating this to them, and they 
replied promising them full protection.® 
393. We may conclude from this that the emperors ought to place 
matters of faith above everything else and to do whatever is necessary 
for the success of the councils with due reverence and charity and 
without compulsion — also that they should be present at the council 
to confirm its [decisions on] faith, not to exercise compulsion, as the 
emperor Marcian said, quoting Constantine, D. 96 [c. 2] Nos ad fidem. 
*Mansi 66, pp. 553, pP- 558-559- 
GEA PTE REX) 
THE EMPEROR SHOULD WORK TO PREVENT ANY 
DISMUR BANG EO R WHE  GOUN GIL SHE SHOULD ESP iE IE 
LHOSESWHO DESERVE LO BE EXPEL EE DEAND 2 UNLS H 
DRHOSEOWEROSDIST URB THE CHURGHSEAD HERS sO 
DREAM PHESe OWN GLE IM AY PRO GERDEIN 
TRANQUILLITY AND FREEDOM. MANY GOOD 
EXAMPLES OFS HISARE (GIVEN: 
394. Also the emperor and all kings when councils meet in their 
domains should strive to prevent any disturbance and expel those who 
should be expelled. Thus the most devout Empress Pulcheria wrote 
to the consul who was general in Bithynia that he should concern 
himself with the good order of the council which had met in Nicaea 
and had not yet been transferred to Chalcedon, “All the reverend 
bishops have met at our direction, awaiting our presence, and with 
God’s help we shall participate shortly. However we have learned that 
certain clerics, monks, and laymen who are in the habit of disturbing 
the good order which is pleasing to God, have come to Nicaea and are 
trying to create a disturbance in a way which is displeasing to us. 
Therefore we have directed these worthy letters to you so that you will 
speedily expel from the city and its environs those clergymen who 
255 


[PDF page 308]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
remain there without having been summoned by us or without the 
permission of their bishops — whether they are included among the 
clergy or in some cases have been removed by their own bishops — as 
well as all monks and laymen who have no reason to be at the council. 
Thus the council may sit in proper order without commotion or 
dissension and all may approve in common what has been revealed by 
Christ the Lord. You should know that if anyone is found there still 
making a disturbance before we come and particularly after our 
arrival, we will see to it that there will be trouble for you.”! 
395. Observe that laymen, monks, and clergy, especially those who 
do not have the permission of their bishops, should not be present at 
universal councils. For no disagreement or tumult should be permit- 
ted in the councils. In the First Action at Chalcedon when the reading 
of the acts of the Council of Ephesus was prevented by the noise, we 
read that the most glorious judges and the full assembly said, “These 
outcries of the people do not please the bishops nor do they aid the 
participants.” This was foreseen in the Council of Toledo and a 
penalty of three days excommunication was provided for those who 
disturbed the council at the holy meeting place.’ 
396. Thus we read in the acts of the Council of Chalcedon that to 
protect the Council of Ephesus the following instructions were given 
by the emperors to Elpidius, a worthy man, and a count of the Sacred 
Consistory, “Therefore we have chosen you and Eulogius, a worthy 
man and a tribune and notary, to be responsible for defending the 
faith since you are proven in many other matters and we consider you 
most upright and zealous for the worship of God and worthy to carry 
out our commands faithfully. You should permit no disturbance to 
take place concerning what may be decided by the holy council in 
Ephesus. But if you see anyone trying to injure the holy faith through 
disagreement and disturbance you ought to place him in custody and 
note this in your report so that the case may be discussed in proper 
order. But you ought to be present at its decisions and expedite its 
labor so that the holy synod may know that its actions are being 
observed and approved. And make known to us whatever is decided.” 
397. And below, “No other business concerning financial matters 
should be discussed until the questions concerning the Catholic faith 
are formally resolved. For we have given you both civil support 
"Mansi 6, p. 555. * Mansi 6, p. 591 and 7, p. 137. 
256 


[PDF page 309]
Book III, para. 399 
through the letters that we have written to the worthy proconsul as 
well as auxiliary military aid, so that with your own resources or with 
this assistance you can do what we have commanded. Questions of 
faith are much more important than any others since divine matters 
are superior to those that are human. And hasten to give us a report 
on what has been done on this matter. A similar letter has been sent to 
the worthy Eulogius.’” 
398. Observe that the emperor ought to be especially concerned 
with the protection of the universal council and should do everything 
to avoid tumult and disturbance and to ensure that what has been 
decreed is observed. These are the responsibilities of the emperor at 
the beginning of a council — to convene it by exhortation and protect 
its liberty without the necessity of exercising compulsion. 
3 Mansi, 6, pp. 595ff. 
CHAPTER XV 
RHE CONVOCATION: OR ATGOUNGIEVBY DEE 
BMPBROR HAS DHE GHARAGT ER) OF AN 
EXHORD ALON IW HELE EA OR HE POPE EAS) EE 
FORGE OFVA COMMAND: BOR TEE PRIBS THO OD: 
CONVOCATION BY THE EMPEROR CAN ACQUIRE THE 
FORCE OF A COMMAND IF DHE CHURCH IS IN 
URGEIND NEE DTAND! DHE FORE OINEGUE Gis ehOrDi® 
ANYTHING. 
399. Doubt could arise on the question of the convocation of the 
council since it is stated above that this is the responsibility of the 
pope. However no one could have any justifiable doubt about the rest 
of what is said there. On that point let us say that the convening of the 
council is of interest to both the pope and the emperor — to the pope 
since by virtue of his rulership of the priesthood he has the power to 
command all the other bishops concerning a meeting to consider the 
general state of the church, since this is his primary responsibility. 
Because he has this power entrusted to him he has the right to 
command faithful Christians to meet, especially all the priests subject 
257 


[PDF page 310]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
to him. But the emperor exhorts and persuades bishops and com- 
mands the laity. 
400. The Roman pontiff does not claim that the right to call the 
council belongs to him alone but that a council may not meet without 
his authorization. And so in a case of imminent danger to the church 
when the emperor first urges the pope and then the others to meet, he 
follows the ancient practice. In such a case he requests the authoriza- 
tion of the Roman pontiff first and then that of the others. And if he 
did not act in this way but called the bishops together without calling 
on the Roman pontiff, it would not be a fully authoritative universal 
council, according to what is said above. It is essential to a council that 
no one be excluded, especially none of the bishops who desire and are 
able to be present. 
401. ‘This is all the more true in the case of the Roman pontiff. But 
if a request was made of the Roman pontiff and he did not send 
representatives and did not come although others obeyed the urging 
of the emperor, the council should not proceed quickly unless the 
necessity of the church — which has no law — should demand quick 
action. 
402. But if the Roman pontiff opposes a meeting called by the 
emperor, it is customary to obey the Roman pontiff unless the necess- 
ity of the church demonstrates persuasively that it is rather the 
emperor who is to be obeyed. Hence I do not think that it is absurd to 
say that since the responsibility to keep the faith has also been 
entrusted to the holy empire, the emperor himself can order a synod 
to provide for the needs of the church if the pope neglects or refuses 
to do so in a case involving great imminent danger of disturbance to 
the church. For despite the fact that proper order and positive law 
have exempted the clergy from the power of the emperor in the 
interest of peace, placing the priesthood above the empire and the 
Roman pontiff over all nevertheless when the reasons for which this 
holy arrangement was established do not apply — since everything was 
established for the preservation of the holy church — we resort then to 
methods appropriate for the times to attain that same end, without 
being concerned about an arrangement that is of no assistance to us. 
And this is sufficient. 
258 


[PDF page 311]
Book III, para. 404 
(CIS UAE ILI IR. OWT 
ACCORDING TO THE RECORDS THE EMPEROR 
PRESIDED OVER THE UNIVERSAL COUNCILS. WITH 
HIM HE HAD A FEW — RARELY MORE THAN FIFTEEN 
— OF HIS SENATORS WHO WERE PRESENT ONLY BY 
HIS COMMAND, AND THERE WERE NO OTHERS. 
THEREFORE THE EMPEROR HAS JURISDICTION OVER 
ALL THE LAYMEN IN THE COUNCIL AND ASSIGNS 
PLACES TOOTHEM. 
403. Now let us seek to discover from the texts of the holy councils 
of the church when it was at its best, how the emperor and his 
patricians and senators should act in the council once it is assembled. 
First of all, I find in the records of all of them — Chalcedon, Constan- 
tinople, Nicaea, and Ephesus — that either the emperor himself was 
present or representatives present by his command from the sacred 
senate and judges — along with in all cases a few of the wisest and 
most important princes. I do not find that their number ever exceeded 
twenty; indeed rarely were there more than fifteen. And when the 
emperor was present in person, I find that he always presided. 
404. At the Sixth Council, Constantine III presided in the center 
along with ten of the more important patricians, and on his left sat the 
representatives of old Rome and of Jerusalem and on his right the 
other patriarchs, first the patriarch of Constantinople, then the 
patriarch of Alexandria, and after him that of Antioch. And the 
bishops from those sees sat together on one bench. At the Eighth 
Council, Basil presided and on the right in order sat the representa- 
tives of the Apostolic See and the other patriarchs. But at Chalcedon, 
since Emperor Marcian was not present at the beginning, the senate 
and the judges sat in the center as Constantine III was described as 
doing. And when Marcian himself came to the Council, he presided 
with a few members of his senate, and the representatives of the 
Apostolic See and the patriarchs sat on each side as they did in the 
Sixth Council. But out of humility Emperor Basil signed the acts of 
the Council after the patriarchs and the representatives of the 
patriarchal sees, although the whole council asked him to sign first, 
259 


[PDF page 312]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
but he refused out of humility as the final acts of that council 
indicate." 
405. Therefore because the senators and patricians and illustrious 
princes who are part of the emperor’s retinue [lit. — body] were 
accustomed to be present only at the command of the emperor as all 
the records indicate, it should be noted that none of the secular 
princes other than the emperor has the right to participate in a univer- 
sal council unless he has been ordered to do so by the emperor or the 
holy council. But those who are parts of the imperial retinue such as 
the patricians, exconsuls, exarchs, and the holy senate should be 
directly associated with the emperor himself. 
406. And so it is an insult to the emperor to prevent him from 
assigning the seating of secular princes who do not have any legal 
right to participate in a universal council and whose right to partici- 
pate derives from his command. For the ranking of the secular par- 
ticipants depends on the emperor, since everyone, including those 
otherwise not subject to him, is under him in the council because of 
his role as protector of the council. Therefore he has jurisdiction over 
all of them. And it is especially insulting to the electors of the holy 
empire who represent the sacred senate and people of Rome and who 
comprise a single body closely linked to the emperor if anyone puts 
himself ahead of them without a command from His Sacred Majesty, 
especially if he is not of higher rank. For the honor of the holy empire 
and the public good this kind of ambition should not be tolerated. 
‘Mansi rr, p. 211; 16, p. 81; 6, p. 579; 16, p. 190. 
GEAR TD ER a il 
LAYMEN MAY NOT SPEAK IN THE COUNCIL WHEN 
GCHURCH MATTERS ARE DISCUSSED. THIS MAKES 11 
EASY DOVAGREPE ON HBSS AhUN GeO vEr@ isi 
SECULAR PRINCES WHOSE PRESENCE WOULD BE 
USE Ue TODAY Sit Sss: 2 @ ll CS SAR Bas Eien bh OI blr 
407. Nevertheless to avoid needless controversy on this subject, it 
should be known that the lay princes mentioned above, even when 
260 


[PDF page 313]
Book III, para. 409 
they are present because of the emperor’s command, do not have the 
right to speak in the council but only to listen. Hence we read in the 
Fourth Action of the Eighth Council that when the representatives of 
old Rome spoke to the princes who were present by order of Basil, 
they said, “O magnificent and glorious princes, ask those who have 
come in to sign this document.” The princes said, ““We will ask them 
in obedience to your command not because of our power. For this 
power is yours.” And at the end in the chapter which begins Multam 
quidem, the substance of which is reproduced below, Emperor Basil 
says “. .. although according to canon law they do not have the right 
to say anything at all about ecclesiastical cases, for this is the responsi- 
bility of bishops and priests .. .”” — he was speaking about the laity.! 
Similarly Ambrose in his letter no. 75, Against Auxentius, says to 
Emperor Valentinian, “If we review all holy writings and actions of 
the ancients, no one would deny that in a matter of faith bishops were 
accustomed to judge Christian emperors, not emperors bishops.” 
And below, “Your father, by God’s grace a man of advanced years, 
used to say, ‘It is not mine to judge bishops.’ Now Your Highness 
says, ‘I ought to judge them,’ while he, although baptized in Christ, 
thought that he was incapable of making such a weighty judgment.’”” 
408. Observe that the emperor should not make a judgment involv- 
ing bishops on matters relating to the faith. But venerable Sedulius 
writes in chapter 11 of his book, On Christian Rulers, that after this 
Emperor Valentinian when he was asked by the holy bishops to be 
present for the issuance of corrections in holy dogma, said to the 
council, “It is not right for me, the least of the people, to look into 
such matters. But let priests whose responsibility it is, come together 
among themselves wherever they wish.”* And in the First Action of 
the Sixth Council (of Constantinople) it says, “Homage to the great 
and most pious Emperor Constantine, beloved of Christ, presiding in 
the council-chamber of his sacred palace, to all those present and 
listening to us at the command of His Highness under God’s 
guidance, and to Niceta, the most glorious exconsul, patrician and 
count of the imperial court . . .””* 
409. Further evidence is provided above where the patrician, 
Bahanes, speaking in the name of the others by command of the 
'Mansi 16, pp. 57ff. ?PL 16, p. 1046. 
*Sedulius Scotus, On Christian Rulers and the Poems, Binghamton, N.Y.: 1983, p. 70. 
(Cf. Bk. m1, no. 288.) *Mansi 11, p. 210. 
261 


[PDF page 314]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
Emperor said that the senate was present to listen. And the acts of the 
Council of Chalcedon prove this where after the princes who were 
present by order of Marcian are listed by name at the beginning, 
there is the addition, ‘‘also present at the holy and universal council 
meeting at the imperial command in the city of Chalcedon, Bishops 
Paschasinus and Lucentius and the priest, Boniface, represent- 
ing the most holy reverend Archbishop Leo of the sweet city of Rome, 
and Anatolius, the most reverend bishop of the famous city of 
Constantinople . . .”° 
410. Note that the council is composed exclusively of priests and 
that laymen do not have a legal right to speak in it, especially when it 
discusses ecclesiastical matters. Therefore since they do not have a 
legal right to speak and they have come only to listen, for the freedom 
of the synod it is right that they are subject to the emperor’s decision 
in all matters relating to the council since they should not be present 
without his order and permission. Therefore secular princes should 
send bishops rather than laymen so that they can have a voice through 
them. And then all questioning would cease since according to canon 
law anyone who wishes to speak should await his turn by seniority of 
rank. But if kings and princes have something to contribute to the 
council they can do this through someone speaking in the usual place 
publicly assigned for this purpose, since no one should be denied a 
hearing. But it is the right of priests to deliberate about and decide 
upon church matters. 
411. If what was rightly introduced in antiquity were observed, 
there would be no question about seating and no disturbance of the 
council would arise on that account. It is true that the princes were 
invited to the Council of Constance and they are sufficiently well 
represented in this Council of ours at Basel to arrive at a single 
concordant agreement of all, for the power of a conciliar decree 
comes from concordance. And for the preservation of our faith which 
has been reduced to a limited area — especially since the power of the 
emperor today does not constrain and compel all as it once did — 
things should be discussed with the participation and support of the 
rulers and kings of other parts of Christendom so that all may see that 
the definitions of the council are just and holy and irrefutable with the 
result that peace will be preserved and schism avoided. 
> Mansi 6, p. 566. On Bahanes, see Book 11, no. 139 and Book 11, nos. 425-426. 
262 


[PDF page 315]
Book Il, para. 414 
412. Great caution therefore should be exercised in assigning seats 
and places to avoid the great confusion that can result from disturb- 
ances which frequently arise from competition over honors on the 
pretext of the defense of one’s dignity. And this situation can easily be 
helped by separating the seats, setting out one bench for the emperor 
and those immediately associated with him, one for the king of France 
and those with him, and the same for the kings of Spain and others, so 
that each ruler is sitting on the bench reserved for his kingdom 
without mixing the various kingdoms — and all the seats are allocated 
according to rank. And the order should be observed in giving [the 
kiss of] peace that the kiss of peace is given according to rank in the 
kingdom to the one who is first in rank on the bench of that kingdom 
and passed on to the others. But in processions let the kings be 
grouped in order at the emperor’s side with all the others walking 
behind them in order, the nobles and ambassadors of each kingdom 
walking in line behind their king, just as they sit on the bench one 
after the other without anyone else between. But if two kings are in 
disagreement over the rank and priority of their kingdoms let both be 
situated at an equal distance from the emperor, with the older one on 
the right and the younger one on the left without prejudice to either 
one. 
413. And let the same thing be done with the seats of two who 
disagree; let the bench of the older one be put on the right, and that of 
the younger on the left. And in procession anyone who is subject to a 
lord will be situated in a single file behind him according to his rank. 
Lacking a better arrangement, perhaps this can easily avoid the 
scandals that often arise. It is certainly equitable and promotes peace, 
and is based on the law of precedence indicated above, according to 
which everyone of whatever rank who represents another as represen- 
tative or legate should sit in the place of the one he represents. 
414. According to this arrangement the bench of the representative 
of any kingdom is considered as the throne of the king whom the 
ambassadors if they are present or the princes nearest to him even 
without special appointment by the king are to represent in the inter- 
est of peace. And who doubts that peace will be preserved in the best 
possible way when this order is also observed on every bench within 
that kingdom with the representatives of the king in front and the 
princes following by rank? 
263 


[PDF page 316]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
GHAR TEREX TT 
THE DULY OP THE EMP ERORSAND (OP Asie THE 
LAYMEN IN THE GOUNCIL IS°RO PROMOTE CLEAR 
AND IMPARTIAL JUDGMENT ON ALL MATTERS THAT 
ARE TREATED THEREXTHEYSHOULD AGT AS 
NEUTRAL JUDGES IN ALL MATTERS. THE 
PROCEDURE FOR A DECISTON BY THES YNODAUS 
DESCRIBED. 
415. Next we should see what His Imperial Majesty should do once 
the council is in session. But I find that the emperors sometimes 
appointed the chairman of the council, as appears in a letter of 
Theodosius and Valentinian to Dioscorus in the Second — con- 
demned — Council of Ephesus, beginning Ante hoc quidem, which says 
“We have considered it necessary to take the occasion of these 
imperial letters to Your Reverence to make manifest to Your Holiness 
and to the whole synod that following the rules of the holy fathers we 
confer the office of chairman upon Your Holiness, both over 
Theodoric |Theodoret] and all the others who are involved in the 
meeting of the sacred council.” But I have not read that this was done 
in any council other than this pseudo-council. As appears in that 
letter this was done out of fear of the Nestorians. Also it is possible 
that the representatives of the Apostolic See of Rome had not 
yet arrived, so that Dioscorus of Alexandria held the chairmanship 
properly.' Hence we should not be too concerned over this. 
416. But the emperor himself should first make an effort to see that 
his judges and senators take great care that everything that is to be 
discussed is properly treated in accordance with canon law — neither 
abruptly nor too quickly nor under the influence of fear or pressure, 
in proper sequence without confusion of subject-matter. Let none of 
the procedures laid down in the holy canons for finding the truth in 
judicial decision and discussions be omitted. For instance, neutral 
judges should be appointed so that what is evident and manifest may 
be made most clear and a definitive conclusion arrived at, which can 
"Mansi 6, p. 599, from the so-called “Robber” Council of Ephesus (449), later overruled 
by the Council of Chalcedon. Nestorius held that there were two persons, human and 
divine, in Christ. 
264 


[PDF page 317]
Book III, para. 419 
be put into execution by His Imperial Majesty without hesitation. 
417. And so I read [in the records of] all the universal councils that 
when the emperors were present, either judges of the sacred palace or 
[members of] the senate acted as moderators to direct everything to 
the clear light of truth, even acting as judges, with the advice of the 
council, on the question of the observance of time-limits and post- 
ponements. Sometimes they also made decisions with the assent and 
manifest approval of the council. For instance on the question of the 
primacy which arose at the Council of Chalcedon between the 
patriarchs of Constantinople and Rome, the judges decided on the 
basis of the canons which had been produced and after their decision 
they asked the holy council whether it agreed or had another opinion. 
But the whole council agreed, as appears at the end of the acts of the 
Council of Chalcedon.’ 
418. But the fixed character of the decision and of whatever is done 
by anyone in a council depends exclusively on the consent of the 
council, as has been said above. Hence whenever we read that the 
judges decided something, the force of their decision depended on 
the consent and authorization of the synod, not on any instructions of 
the emperor whose authority is not superior to that of the universal 
council. However by their own authority the emperors can seek to 
have matters carried out in canonical form so that they cannot be 
blamed for the conduct of the discussion, since they append their 
signatures by way of confirmation at the end as witnesses to a proper 
judgment. 
41g. It would be too long to review all the details of the interven- 
tions by the emperors and judges aimed at finding out the truth of the 
matter under investigation. But there is one conclusion — it was done 
in the way in which canonical decisions ought to be carried out — i.e., 
the accused should be called three times and led into the synod, the 
charge should be read, the accused should answer, the council should 
deliberate, what has been denied should be proven, it should be 
demonstrated from the acts of the councils and the writings of the 
proper fathers that what is objected to is heresy, [and] the notary with 
the book should swear that this is the authentic text in the records. 
These and similar actions should be taken as appropriate for the case. 
Another good procedure was followed that the canons in which 
2 Mansi 7, pp. 451-454. 3 Mansi 6, p. 650. 
265 


[PDF page 318]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
anyone found a relevant passage were produced in writing and the 
other side indicated whether it believed or suspected that the text had 
been altered.* And so the decisions of the councils were always very 
clear and open. So much for this matter. 
* Mansi 7, p. 8. 
CHAPTER XIX 
THE EMPEROR OUGHT DOLE XHORT WT AE SW IE 
GCOUNGIL, AS DID THE MOST PIOUS BASIE. His 
NODABL Bes: bE GHels sO OTD eA ear ING AGE» 
420. I have said [that] next [we would discuss] the emperor’s 
customary conduct in the council. Since the emperor often gave 
gracious speeches of exhortation to the councils, I have made an 
effort to include the speech made at the Eighth Council by Basil, a 
most devout Christian emperor,' whose footsteps our most invincible 
Emperor Sigismund, crowned by God, is following in this Council of 
Basel — so that one might properly say that this holy Council of Basel 
is being carried out with another Basil presiding. At the opening of 
the council, the most gentle Emperor Basil spoke [as follows]: “Since 
divine providence has most kindly committed the government of the 
world to us, we have made every effort to resolve first the public needs 
of the church and to establish stable tranquillity by settling the 
quarrels which have increased over the years because of Satan’s 
hatred of the good. By divine inspiration we have long desired a 
council and we have now decided to bring together representatives 
from the other patriarchal sees for the aforesaid reason and the King 
of Infinite Power, the Prince of Peace, who governs our empire has 
cooperated with our intention. As you see he has filled our council 
and brought it together for this very purpose.” 
421. “From old Rome two bishops have come and one deacon of 
the seven authorized — all known for their prudence, intellect, and 
religious life; from the eastern patriarchate of Antioch, we see the 
"On the character of Emperor Basil, see 1, 1, no. 73, n. 3, and D. Stiernon, Constantinople 
IV, Paris, 1967. 
266 


[PDF page 319]
Book III, para. 424 
most holy and reverend archbishop of Tyre; from the holy church of 
God in Jerusalem, the holy Zion, out of which, as was prophesied, 
came the new law and the judge of all nations, the Word of the Lord - 
[we see] its most holy secretary, an apostolic man filled with all divine 
and human wisdom.” 
422. “Therefore with the cooperation and grace of Christ, the 
universal king and God who rules over all things, by our imperial 
diligence and zeal we have removed what seemed to all of you to be 
insuperable obstacles. We urge and exhort all of you, brethren, to 
participate with humility and reverence in this holy universal council 
as a meeting which is generally useful to all. Eliminate unhealthy 
remedies, movements, or affections and do not look for contention, 
knowing that it is better to be defeated than to win in a sinful or unjust 
way. For thus everyone who suffers internal infection will receive 
health and attain eternal salvation. We give the support of our empire 
to you who have received from God the power to decide in councils. 
For we do not doubt that you love and pursue divine truth and justice 
as far as you can.” 
423. “But so that it may become clear that insofar as power has 
been given us in church matters by God we have omitted none of the 
things that are necessary and convenient, we especially ask you now to 
rise above all favoritism and hatred and imitate the dispassionateness 
of the divine nature in not showing partiality to anyone in your deci- 
sion, whether to the powerful because of their rank or personal 
friendship, or the poor out of pity for their condition. Thus a most 
peaceful church order will follow, in accordance with the intention of 
the will of God and of our most tranquil empire.” 
424. It would be [too] lengthy to insert the eloquent speeches of 
other emperors. Every emperor has striven to adapt his exhortation to 
the matters under discussion as did this and other most pious 
emperors. 
* Mansi 16, pp. 18ff. 
267 


[PDF page 320]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
GHAP PER IX 
THE-EMPEROR MAY SEND MESSAGES TO HIS 
REPRESENTATIVES, PERSUADING AND ADVISING 
THE GOUNCGILE, AS SHAS BEEN DONE SIN GEESR AS De 
THE PROCEDURE IN-SDHE EIGHTH COUNGILE 
ASSEMBLED BY EMPEROR BASIL TS CITED: 
425. It was customary for the emperors if they themselves were 
absent to give those who were to represent them at the council an 
address containing suggestions on the matters which were to be con- 
sidered. Thus we read that in the Seventh Action of the Eighth 
Council, the patrician and prefect, Bahanes, said to the council while 
Photius was present in the council with his bishops, ““Through me, 
his unworthy servant, our holy emperor wishes to make a speech to 
these bishops.”’ The most reverend representatives of old Rome said, 
“As the emperor commands.” Bahanes said to Photius and _ his 
bishops, ““The emperor addresses you. Tell us, men, where you come 
from. Do you come from heaven, from hell, or from the earth where 
we live? Show me now for if there has been a heresy or a schism 
somewhere and anyone is in disagreement with the four patriarchates, 
why has he been spared? Answer, | am listening. Today there are four 
patriarchates, in fact five, that condemn you. What do you say about 
this? Is there anything in your favor? If so, tell me.” Photius’ bishops 
said, ““The canons of the holy apostles and the fathers.” Bahanes 
replied, in accordance with the command of the emperor. “Tell me 
what canon is in your favor. Where did the Lord set up his canons — in 
his churches or somewhere else? And where are these churches today 
and where is the gospel preached? Is it anywhere else than where 
these representatives are? Tell me.” The bishops of Photius said, 
“God save our emperor. We have sought a guarantee that we could 
speak without being punished in order that we might explain our 
position in full confidence but this was not granted. How then are we 
to speak?” Bahanes said, ‘“‘Our holy emperor addresses this warning 
to you. God has heard my prayer and brought these holy men from 
the ends of the earth to act not on the basis of appearances but of 
equity and justice. You say you would accept a guarantee of protec- 
tion. On this I wish anyone who has been hurt or injured by me to say 
268 


[PDF page 321]
Book IIT, para. 428 
so. Now the representatives of all the bishoprics are here so that you 
may say whatever you have to say to defend yourselves.” The bishops 
of Photius said, “We know that the holy emperor does not wish to 
cause harm to anyone. What can we say? If we said what we deserved, 
it would not be done.” 
426. Bahanes said, “By our holy emperor’s orders, you may say 
anything. For he commands, desires, and agrees that you should 
speak. But in view of your insults, the judges do not wish to hear you.” 
The bishops supporting Photius said, “We do not recognize those 
judges.” Bahanes said, “Do they violate the rule of the patriarchs and 
make judgments contrary to reason?” Amphilochus, a bishop under 
Photius, said, “Totally contrary to reason.” Bahanes said, ““And do 
they make judgments in violation of the rules of their patriarchs?” 
The bishops of Photius said, “Indeed they do.” Bahanes said, “Go to 
the patriarchates and prove it.” The most reverend Christian emperor 
Basil said, “Whatever you think about all this, since you know that 
these men [the judges] come from the patriarchates with letters of 
recommendation, accept them and whatever they decide. Whatever 
doubts you have — you say that they are not fair and so do not act in 
accordance with the directions of the patriarchs — go there and dis- 
cuss it with them and bring us better proof and we will so order.” The 
bishops of Photius said, “We did not witness this decision. Why do we 
have to obey a decision which we did not witness?” At the bidding of 
the emperor, Bahanes said, “The holy emperor says, do not say, 
brethren, that I wish to send you there for any of you to perish. God is 
my witness, before the whole senate and the sacred council, | say that 
whomever I send there | will bring back here again.” 
427. Many similar things which should be noted appear in the acts. 
I have quoted from them because they contain a particular point 
which is always valid: the emperor should see to it that the council 
conducts its sessions in the clearest possible way, avoiding any actions 
which might be called into question. 
428. There is another interesting thing in these acts. It appears 
there that when the bishops supporting Photius wanted to defend 
themselves with numerous arguments and actions, the emperor said 
that the persons cited by them had later been forgiven by the church, 
“But you remain in a state of sin today and lie like dead men in the 
'Mansi 16, pp. 9off. 
269 


[PDF page 322]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
tomb of your iniquity. Hence all the high patriarchs together con- 
demn you. But our divinely-strengthened empire is peace-loving and 
kind and concerned with your guidance and is taking measures for 
you to receive the forgiveness that the holy universal council decides. 
For we all know that you are laymen (not bishops) and we have not 
brought you to rant and rave and act out of order. All your words are 
lying and deceitful.” The bishops of Photius said, “The devil himself 
has not dared to say that we are laymen, even if they [our opponents] 
say it.” 
429. The emperor said that they were laymen because they had 
been ordained by Photius who was not a bishop, and they wished to 
defend Photius and themselves. And when a certain Eulampius, one 
of Photius’ bishops, came to speak with the emperor, the representa- 
tives of the Apostolic See said that Eulampius had been condemned 
and excommunicated by the Apostolic See and therefore the emperor 
should not speak to him: 
430. Then Basil said, “I have prayed repeatedly that they might not 
be lost and therefore I have called them here. If they do not agree with 
the church, they will confirm what the patriarchs have decided even 
without wishing to do so. For no one can reject the power given to the 
patriarchs by Christ, our God and Saviour.’”* Note the devotion and 
concern that the emperor should have, especially his faith in, and 
fidelity to, the things decided by the councils. 
* Mansi 16, pp. 88-89. 
CHAPTER XxXI 
THE EMPEROR CAN AND SHOULD GIVE THE 
COUNCIL HIS OPINION AS TO WHAT IS NECESSARY 
FOR THE CHURCH. THIS SHOULD BE DISCUSSED IN 
THE SYNOD, AS WAS DONE IN THE CASE OF 
EMPEROR MARCIAN. 
431. ‘The emperor should also give his advice on the business to be 
transacted by the council and if anything seems appropriate for legis- 
lative action, he should suggest what the council should do and press 
270 


[PDF page 323]
Book III, para. 434 
for its adoption. For example, Marcian, the emperor at the Council of 
Chalcedon, said to the council, “There are certain points that we have 
reserved for action by your holinesses out of respect for your honor, 
thinking that normally it is better for them to be decided by this 
council than for us to decree them through our laws.” At the com- 
mand of the most holy and devout emperor, Beronicianus, the most 
devout secretary of the sacred consistory, read out the points. And the 
first chapter said that monks who are in individual cities and provinces 
should be subject to a bishop and should observe silence and devote 
themselves only to fasting and prayer.' 
432. And this statute on monks was read by King Henry and King 
Charles meeting in council with certain bishops at Koblenz in the 
diocese of Trier.’ 
433. The second chapter [at Chalcedon] said that clerics should not 
involve themselves in worldly possessions, nor amass property, nor 
become legal representatives in administering the property of others. 
The third chapter said that clerics should remain at one post and 
serve where they were first assigned. These chapters were praised, 
approved, and decreed by the holy council, although, alas, they are 
not observed today. 
434. We read that Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian wrote to 
the Council of Ephesus about Bishop Ibas as follows: ““The victorious 
triumphant august and beloved Emperors Theodosius and Valen- 
tinian, to the holy Council of Ephesus: Numerous reports have been 
sent here from the city of Edessa in the province of Osdroena 
[Mesopotamia] along with records from there referring to the deposi- 
tion of many reverend clergy, most religious archimandrites [abbots], 
and holders of church offices. And nearly all the people of that city 
bring testimony against Ibas, the bishop of the city of Edessa, accus- 
ing him of impiety and blasphemy. Since therefore it is appropriate 
that this type of crime should be corrected by your holy council, for it 
is not right to disbelieve the testimony of so many, please read the 
testimony and record, depose him, and appoint another religious man 
in his place. For if the authorities in major cities are orthodox, the 
others will necessarily follow their teachings.”* The holy emperors 
'Mansi 7, pp. 174ff. 
* Henry I of Germany and Charles III of France at Koblenz, A.D. 922 (Mansi 18, p. 343). 
3From the Second or “Robber” Council of Ephesus (449). Only a Syriac version, 
translated into German in 1873 survives, but Cusanus seems to have had a Latin 
version. See Book 1, no. 73. 
27% 


[PDF page 324]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
were accustomed to give this and similar advice as appropriate. It may 
serve as an example for our most glorious [Emperor] Sigismund and 
his successors. 
CHAPTER XXII 
LIKE EMPEROR MARCIAN, THE EMPEROR SHOULD 
UPHOLD THE PRESCRIPTIONS OF DHE GOUNGIES 
AUNIDES: 2 Re LAW IEE YavAIRSE (Ol Si ERSV EADS 
435. Finally on this subject, His Imperial Highness should know 
that he ought to see that the statutes and definitions of the holy 
councils are observed by also adopting laws that inflict penalties on 
those who do not observe them. Hence it is proper that he should 
inquire of the sacred council whether the matters that are communi- 
cated to His Majesty have been decided with the counsel and consent 
of all. The most pious [Emperor] Marcian when the declaration of 
faith which had been published as dogma at Chalcedon was read to 
him, asked if what had been read had been confirmed by the consent 
of all religious bishops. When he received the answer from the 
council that this was the case — the council gave high praise to the 
emperor — he adopted a law in the following words, “The holy 
Catholic faith in the traditions of the fathers has been made known by 
the holy synod. We are convinced that it is also just and useful that all 
future contention on matters of religion be eliminated. Therefore if 
anyone, whether he is a private citizen or a paid soldier or connected 
with the clergy, should publicly disagree on the faith or stir up a 
disturbance among the people, let him know that if he is a private 
citizen he will be expelled from the most holy city, if a soldier he will 
be removed from his militia, if a clergyman deposed from his church 
office [and] other additional punishments will be imposed.” The holy 
synod cried out, “Long live the Christian prince. We wish you a long 
life, O prince!””! 
436. I could quote similar passages from many conciliar acts. But I 
could not avoid including a statement by the most pious Basil because 
' Mansi 7, p. 173. 
272 


[PDF page 325]
Book III, para. 438 
it is notable and worth recording. Thus we read that at the end of the 
Eighth Council: Basil, the most pious Christian emperor, said to the 
council: 
CEVA A ER excl Til 
DAE ELOQUENT SPEECH OF EMPEROR BASIE: DO] DHE 
GOUNCGIEVISERE PRO DUCED IN ih  EhetN DiGA th Es 
TAT HE EMPEROR SHOU LDY SEE TOD LAAT Lik 
COUNCIL ARRIVES AT ITS DECISIONS IN GOOD 
ORDER AFTER EVERYONE WHO WISHES TO BE 
HEARD HAS SPOKEN, FOLLOWING WHICH NO ONE 
WHO SISSOPPOSED UTS DO BESADMITTED. DHE SPE PEGH 
HAS MANY OTHER NOTEWORTHY POINTS. 
437. “Your holinesses, gathered here by the will of God, have 
undergone great vexation and labor in coming to our happy city for 
the purpose of establishing order in the church. For this it has been 
necessary to remain here for a long time. Many of you have had no 
regard for your old age and bodily infirmity. You have bravely 
tolerated the lack of repose and endured with magnanimity the long 
separation from your spiritual brothers. But now you see how sweet 
and beneficial to the church is the conclusion of your painful labors. 
For the common agreement and consent in the Holy Spirit of this 
great universal synod have removed every scandal and offense from 
the church, quieted long-standing disturbances, and restored a state 
of calm tranquillity. 
438. “And so we give thanks to the Lord, worthy fathers, for all the 
good things which God has given us, and we recognize your zeal for 
God’s will. We ask from the munificence of the great King of the 
universe that a bounteous reward be given to you in recompense for 
your trials and labors. For this purpose we have striven to refresh and 
encourage you and to fulfill your every desire. We have thought it 
right to say this for the common benefit of all and the continuing 
peace of the holy church of God before all those listening, because 
there are those who are opposed to the happiness and some are hurt. 
[lit. - wounded by the serpent’s tongue] when ecclesiastical order is 
273 


[PDF page 326]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
established. Indeed they are pleased with commotion and anger and 
delighted if they see the church beset by storms. 
439. “But to them we say directly today: Whoever has anything to 
say against this holy universal synod or its canons and conclusions, let 
him stand up and say what he thinks — whether he is a bishop or 
clergyman or layman or civil official — although according to canon 
law he has no right to say anything on church matters [since] that is 
the work of bishops and priests. However since we wish every 
iniquitous opinion to be thoroughly answered, we grant permission to 
all who have any doubts in mind concerning what has been decreed by 
this holy synod to reveal it in our midst and receive the saving remedy 
of satisfaction. 
440. “We have made this mighty effort and, as you know, have 
labored to bring together those who have come from Rome and from 
the eastern patriarchal sees which many before us have tried and 
failed to do. Most devout high-ranking clergy have suffered not little 
travail and sorrow, coming from afar to the discussions of this holy 
synod. Whoever therefore has anything to say, let him say it while the 
council is in session. For once this holy universal synod is dissolved 
anyone who appears to oppose the church of God or not be in 
communion with it, whether he is a bishop or simple priest whatever 
his rank or office, will not be pardoned by us. Rather he will be 
condemned and driven from the city as a source of corruption and 
pestilence, a rotting and useless member infecting the common body 
of the church. 
441. “But you, O high priests who are endowed with the episcopate 
and who love virtue and are close to God, do not hesitate to warn, 
each of you, his own flock and lead it to salvation by indicating how 
evil it is to disturb the peace of the church of God, to rebel against 
those who rule over its members, and to separate oneself from the 
divine mysteries for irrational and base reasons. Direct to divine 
perfection the flock subject to you each Sunday with the words of 
doctrine and, as good shepherds, convert those who are involved in 
any heretical errors. For your holinesses in your virtue know that if a 
heresy becomes known to you in any of your provinces and is not 
rooted out and returned to the orthodox faith by your assiduous 
instruction, you will be condemned in accordance with the canons by 
your own patriarch. Through sacred doctrine and admonition let your 
most holy flock be fed by saving food. 
274 


[PDF page 327]
Book III, para. 446 
442. “But be gentle to one another and conserve the bond of unity 
of the church for which you have labored, and which you have agreed 
upon, and confirmed in word and action in this holy universal synod. 
Let no contention or mutual obstinacy bring about a new disruption 
of the common body of the church and prevent you from receiving 
pardon on the day of just retribution. Let your friendship and consent 
be a most stringent norm bringing order to the whole world. Your 
subjects look to you as painters do to their models. They are guided 
by your lives and moral direction. 
443. ‘But you who are members of the clergy of the church of God 
keep your mutual order and concord and in no way depart in your 
preaching from what has been decided by the Holy Spirit in this great 
universal synod. For you have agreed on all questions and you have 
seen the truth to which you have consented and agreed shine forth 
more clearly than the sun. 
444. “But what else shall I say to you who are members of the laity, 
whether officeholders or not. I do not have anything to say other than 
that you are not permitted to discuss ecclesiastical matters nor 
threaten the integrity of the church nor oppose the universal synod. 
445. ‘To investigate and inquire into these things is the responsi- 
bility of patriarchs, of bishops, and of priests who have been assigned 
the responsibility of rule. They have the power of making holy, of 
binding and loosing. They have been given the ecclesiastical and 
heavenly keys. This is not our responsibility. We are to be given 
pastoral direction and made holy, loosed or freed from bonds. If 
anyone is a layman, no matter how wise or religious he is, even if he 
has every virtue within him, as long as he is a layman he does not 
cease to be a sheep in the flock. And again a bishop, however lacking 
in holiness and every virtue, as long as he is bishop and preaches the 
word of truth correctly, will not be deprived of the rank of shepherd. 
446. “What reason, therefore, is there for us, the sheep, to judge 
the shepherds with subtle words and to seek to peruse those things 
which are above us? We should approach them with fear and sincere 
faith and stand in awe of their countenances, since they are the 
ministers of Almighty God and they possess his likeness. We should 
do nothing more than what is appropriate to our rank. But now as we 
see, malice has incited many here to the insanity of forgetting their 
own rank. Not recognizing that they are the feet, they wish to make 
law for the eyes, not as nature would have it but as they desire. Each 
a5 


[PDF page 328]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
one is always ready to accuse his superiors, but slow to correct crimi- 
nal actions of which he is accused. I advise and exhort all those who 
act in this way to cease directing their accursed hatred towards others, 
to desist from judging the judges, and to attend to themselves and to 
strive to live in accordance with the divine will. For heaven’s judg- 
ment will not rest but divine anger will descend on the dissident and 
bring just retribution upon all for their acts. Above all we pray to the 
Holy God that all the nobles, that is, the leading rulers, not only will 
remain in his favor untouched by divine wrath, but also will attain 
their eternal reward by the prayers and intercession of the Most Holy 
Mother, Our Lady, and of all the saints and by the prayers and 
supplications of this holy universal synod. Amen.” 
447. And after the reading, Basil, the great emperor and friend of 
Christ, said, ““Whoever of those in this holy and universal synod 
wishes to do so should say in what respect he is hesitant or in doubt 
about what has now been read.” The holy synod cried out: “What has 
been read is pleasing to all. We all agree with it. We all freely sub- 
scribe to it!””! 
448. This is the formula used by the most pious Basil which our 
own all-merciful emperor, whom we have called a second Basil, and 
any Catholic emperor should follow. When he has observed that it is 
evident that everything has been approved orally and by a show of 
hands by all in the council, he should add his approval and affix his 
seal in confirmation, thus attaching penal and coercive sanctions so 
that the decrees will be observed and respected. And as the common 
father of all, he should also advise all the priests to carry out their 
offices and pray to the Most High and make special efforts that the 
flock and members of Christ may be fed the food of salvation by their 
own true shepherds and not mercenaries. And he should exhibit 
paternal care for all and bring back those who wander from the path 
of piety to the right way by every possible method. For man is a noble 
animal who would rather be led than compelled and the kindly hand 
pacifies the wild animal. 
449. Now in order to show how skilfully this was done by the most 
sweet Basil, let us add the public statement [epanagnosticon| that he 
sent in that council to the bishops who supported the schism of 
Photius who had seized the see of Constantinople — for it is full of 
'Mansi 16, pp. 186-188. 
276 


[PDF page 329]
Book III, para. 451 
sweet instruction. The public statement in the Sixth Action of the 
Eighth Universal Council on the divisions caused by the schismatics 
reads as follows: 
GBAPD ER SOX 
THEINODGABLE EXAMPLE (OF Dib ePlOUS! EMPEROR 
ASL, LLL AURS IOS) AM Sid, IDIIAMO MRO IN: Wiser el Aleta 
EMPEROR SHOULD EXHIBIT AS COMMON FATHER 
AND SHEPHERD IN BRINGING BACK THOSE WHO 
HAVE GONE ASDRAY. HEIOUGHA ROLENPOR GE MEE 
SHNIENGE OF DHE COUNCIL AGAINSD THOSE WEHO 
REBEL AND WHO DO NOT AGREE TO THE IMPERIAL 
EXHORTATION. OUR EMPEROR, A SECOND BASIL, 
SHOULD FOLLOW THAT EXAMPLE IN BRINGING 
BACK THE ERRANT BOHEMIANS. 
450. ‘Your many common sufferings have caused us to lament and 
be saddened as we watched and protected you in the past. But a 
greater evil, a genuine calamity, is the disturbance of the church, the 
evil work of the devil plotting against it, the destruction of peace and 
dissolution of the ancient order, the bold attacks of the subordinate 
against the superior and of the dishonorable against the honorable, 
and every kind of subversion of the order of the church. While the 
council attempts to apply justice to those outside it, within the church 
injustice triumphs and love of domination and self-love, and because 
of this laxity is widespread along with insane fury against one’s 
spiritual father. 
451. ‘“These are the thoughts that seize and disturb my soul. Like a 
thick cloud they darken my spirit and bring tears to my eyes. | will call 
upon the Divinity for help in resolving this sad state of affairs. My 
labor and intention was, if possible, to bring about the unification of 
the church. This has in fact taken place as all of you who have come to 
this holy meeting know. I have left every other governing responsi- 
bility which is mine and from the outset I have devoted myself to this 
alone. As requested by each of the dissident parties and following the 
ancient tradition of the church I have now brought together the other 
277 


[PDF page 330]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
patriarchal sees to act as judges of what has taken place in our church. 
With the cooperation of the Holy Spirit, | have done what many of 
those who have ruled before me wished to see, but none achieved to 
the same degree. 
452. “And whatever pertains to the unity and order of the church 
has been carefully carried out by me. I have achieved both small and 
great results without the exercise of the coercive power that some 
have used. For not only has my government made efforts that the 
most holy patriarch [Ignatius] may return to his see but much earlier 
the most holy and blessed Pope Nicholas when he learned the facts of 
the case decreed in his synod that his see should be restored to him, 
and with the whole Roman church he declared anathema those who 
resisted this decree and decision. 
453. ‘We, once we knew this and fearing the promulgated judg- 
ment of anathema, felt it necessary to support the judgment of the 
synod of the Roman church, and for this reason we restored him to 
his see. Because of the superior prudence of both the Roman see and 
the sees in the East, our representatives with our approval did not 
impede or oppose or favor either party. Because of this I did not wish 
to appear at any synodal judgement — contrary to the idle chatter of 
many — so that no one could say that in any synodal judgment the 
hand and sword, protection and earthly power of the empire had 
subverted the council. One desire and one request alone was ours to 
the aforementioned judges when we saw them, that they not permit 
anyone to be lost or expelled from the church of God, if this was 
possible. 
454. ‘This alone is our crime if anyone wishes to call it that. But 
everything else we have left to the canons and to those who are in 
charge of the synod, supporting it firmly and condemning, that is, 
requesting condemnation, in keeping with the present judgment, and 
urging that they decide nothing in favoritism or in hatred, but rather 
conduct themselves with greater humanity toward those who had 
fallen into error. In the sight of all we ask them individually and 
collectively, to extend their hands today to those who offer forgiveness 
and to join in the celebration of a united church. 
455. ‘Go, O spiritual fathers and defenders of truth who are signed 
with the chrism of Aaron and with the zeal of Phineas and the 
judgment of Solomon; seek the sheep that was lost; bring back the 
sheep that have gone astray. Take the solitary by the shoulder and 
278 


[PDF page 331]
Book Ill, para. 458 
constrain him with the bonds of compassion. Dress the wound with 
kindness. Join in forgiveness to the ninety-nine sheep the one that was 
cast out of the spiritual flock. In imitation of Christ leave an eternal 
memorial of your compassion for future generations. You also, our 
friends and dear ones, who need care and healing, precious members 
of Christ, although I do not know by what evil demon you were 
separated from the head, the true vine, which your rude and unjust 
contention has turned to bitterness. If on the contrary you remain in 
opposition because of irrational hatred and reject unity, hear my 
words of warning — even, I am not mistaken in saying, of supplication. 
456. “The mercy which we have for you had led us to this. Look 
into your innermost consciences and you will find that you were 
wrong to separate yourselves from the church. Brethren, the hour is 
very late and the verdict is imminent. Let us not remain separated 
from his church and far from its glory. Let us not consider it base to 
show our feelings and exhibit our wounds, to seek penitence and 
healing and to enter the company of the saved — lest by thinking that 
to obey is to be defeated, we experience eternal defeat. 
457. ‘But what kind of defeat is it, brethren, to prostrate oneself 
before God and seek pardon? For to prostrate oneself before the 
church and one’s spiritual fathers is to prostrate oneself before God. 
It is true defeat and the greatest shame, indeed it is opposition to 
God, not to be willing to confess all of our sins and to humiliate 
ourselves for Christ and to save ourselves and many others. 
458. “But if you think that this is defeat, I who have been given the 
crown of empire, will become a model of the deepest humility for you. 
I, inexperienced and foolish as I am, will begin for you who are wise 
and brilliant. Steeped in sin as I am, | will be the prototype for you 
who are pure and examples of virtue. First of all, I will prostrate 
myself upon the pavement, disregarding my purple robes and diadem. 
Come near to my face and look deep into my eyes and do not think it 
an offense to tread on the shoulderblades of the emperor. Do not fear 
to touch with your feet the forehead on which God has placed the 
crown. I am ready to endure everything which seems to you to signify 
defeat. For me it seems to be glory and greatness. For I do not care 
for my own glory in this, if I may see us celebrate a united church 
together. Thus I will avoid the loss of my soul and prevent the devil, 
the enemy of all, from rejoicing in making me his captive. What I 
desire is that the light of my hope may not be suddenly extinguished 
279 


[PDF page 332]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
which has lighted the way to our common happiness and joy. I do not 
know what was to be done that I have not done, or what words of 
admonition and entreaty were to be spoken that I did not speak. ‘The 
responsibility is yours. I am innocent of your perdition. 
459. “But if at the great and fearful judgment on the last day you 
condemn us to give an account, as it were, for you, be aware that I 
know that there will not a word of justification for you then nor is 
there here today except for what has emerged in this controversy. But 
if you wish before that judgment to inquire of the judgment seat of 
your conscience, you will find nothing other than what has been said 
by us, your ruler. 
460. “And so leave off contention, brethren, and take up fraternal 
love once more. Flee dissension and embrace unity. Reject hatred and 
receive love in your heart. Stand with the upright and join with your 
head. Receive the grace of divine communion through obedience and 
you will not be concerned with secular things. 
461. “For there are many modes of acceptance, that is, of 
assistance, in our most patient empire through which we can console 
you and we will make unceasing efforts to give you worldly opportuni- 
ties. And again we will strive in many ways, asking and bending every 
effort to persuade your spiritual fathers and the patriarchs to dispense 
you from whatever sanctions burden your spirit, only to prevent you 
from acting rashly against your salvation. There is no time more 
appropriate for the acceptance of repentance than the present, for 
those who today can bind and loose the affairs of the church are at 
hand. Cease seeking postponements and expecting a change of 
circumstances. Even if this takes place some day, it will not help 
you. 
462. ‘For even if time should change other things, it can not change 
this. For if the irrational act of one man among you although it was 
totally in error has created such a furor that it has been very difficult 
to reverse it, tell me the action and the person who can reverse the 
decision of the four patriarchal sees? To whom will you flee in search 
of release from your obligation? To the Roman bishop? But he has 
just condemned you. To that of Antioch? But he was in agreement 
with that of Rome. To that of Jerusalem or Alexandria? Those sees 
agreed to your condemnation. And if the one who has violated all the 
canons ever commits the see of Constantinople to you and you wish to 
hold a meeting, who will follow you and how can you open your eyes 
280 


[PDF page 333]
Book IIT, para. 465 
and look at anyone when you are impugned by all the priests and 
patriarchal sees? 
463. “Therefore, brethren, do not deceive yourselves and lose the 
opportunity for your salvation. You will not find it at some other time. 
Give up your continual contention and obstinacy. Come to the com- 
mon healing and accept the remedial medicine. Adhere to our 
spiritual head and enter into communion with the church of God so 
that you may be cleansed of your crime; find a generous God; make 
the church and our empire rejoice; bring about a celebration of the 
spirit; fill the whole commonwealth with the greatest joy and festive- 
ness. Let us all bless the Lord together, our Glory and the Prince of 
Peace, and the one who has gathered us here and has enabled us to 
work well together — through the intercession of Our Most Blessed 
Lady, the Mother of God, and of the angels and all the saints who see 
God. Amen.” 
464. After this reading Theodorus, secretary of the representatives 
of old Rome, stood up and read: “See how the most sweet Christian 
ruler of the empire granted to him by God does not wish one sheep 
entrusted to him by Christ to be lost — transforming exile, tribulation, 
and anxiety into admonition and prayer.””! 
465. Note the humanity and earnestness of the emperor’s concern 
that not even one of the sheep entrusted to him be lost. O most pious 
Sigismund, successor to Basil, exercise your inborn clemency and 
apply what has been read with your customary sweet eloquence. 
Through your prayers and mercy bring back the inhabitants of the 
noble kingdom of Bohemia who are cut off from the way of salvation, 
and may each word of this speech serve you in all your efforts.? With 
what zeal did the former holy emperors give their greatest efforts to 
the increase of the orthodox faith. May your zeal be no less in saving 
those who have long been a part of the church. May all things possible 
be done with piety and mercy. When Christ, the spouse of the church, 
sees this, he will undoubtedly give wonderful effect to your loving 
prayer. When what humility requires is properly done, victory in war 
will be assured. The proud, puffed-up, and diabolical cannot over- 
come those armed with the charity and humility of Christ who seek 
his honor alone. 
'Mansi 16, pp. 92-95. 
* A provisional settlement was reached with the Hussites in early 1434. It was similar to 
the proposals that Cusanus had made in 1433 in his work, De usu communionis. 
281 


[PDF page 334]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
466. Take action, O most Christian prince, to moderate their cruel 
ferocity through this sacred council and your gentle persuasion. 
Although the spirit of the Lord cannot be infused immediately, each 
day they will become more responsive because of daily contact with 
Christ’s faithful and they will look into their hearts and finally see that 
they were wrong to rely on their own wisdom and proudly set them- 
selves up against the common opinion of all Catholics. 
467. This matter should be treated with the greatest care and 
unceasing use of every means, so that Satan who does not easily leave 
hearts that he has possessed for a long time may finally be overcome. 
Like your prototype, Basil, you have, O prince, the admirable gift 
from on high of being able with effort and prudence to bring back any 
schismatic to unity. In your royal wisdom you did this at Constance 
when schism infected the Roman pontiffs, as Basil did it in Eighth 
Council of Constantinople in the case of the opposing patriarchs of 
Constantinople, Photius and Ignatius. In addition you have made 
great efforts in this most sacred Council of Basel to bring the mem- 
bers of the church and its head, our most holy pope Eugene, together 
in unity, as Basil did with the subject bishops who were opposed to 
Ignatius in that other council at Constantinople. 
468. Now it remains for you to bring back the others who remain in 
your glorious and flourishing kingdom of Bohemia as Basil, a few 
years earlier had so laudably done with those image-breakers who 
destroyed the images of Christ and the saints and condemned their 
veneration’ — and many Bohemians are followers of this belief. In this 
time of troubles for the church much like the time when Basil ruled 
the empire, by divine intention you have been established as emperor 
for the general welfare so that following in his footsteps, you may do 
what he did under the inspiration of God. But it is vain to urge the 
one who is already running to run. Your natural wisdom and religious 
belief urge you to these holy works much more than any extraneous 
persuasion, however erudite. Therefore I will not tire you further with 
words, O great emperor, to induce you to go on with your work. 
3 The Iconoclast (“Image-Breakers”’) controversy in the eastern church had been settled 
in A.D. 843, well before Basil became emperor. 
282 


[PDF page 335]
Book IIT, para. 471 
CHAPTER XXV 
THE CHAPTER DISCUSSES THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL 
MADE UPR Oe THE PRINGIPAT MEMBERS OR He 
EMPIRE, WHICH HAS MET IN THE PAST AND IS VERY 
USEFUL BOR THE GOVERNMENT OF DHE 
COMMONWEALTH IF IT IS PROPERLY ORGANIZED 
AND MEETS REGULARLY. EXAMPLES AND WARNINGS 
ARE GIVEN. 
469. At this point we should discuss the imperial council at length, 
in accordance with the statement above that all matters relating to the 
good government of the commonwealth should after mature and 
ample discussion be adopted as laws with the consent of all. This will 
be easy for us since the universal council of the priests is properly 
organized along similar lines, and we have already given a description 
of all aspects of that council above.' 
470. We know that the emperor as the head and first of all com- 
mands subordinate kings and princes to assemble. But those who are 
obligated to meet as members with that head in this universal council 
of the empire are the princes, the heads of the provinces representing 
their provinces, and also the rectors of the major universities and 
professors, and those of the senatorial rank which qualifies them for 
the imperial assembly [conventus]. These are either the s//ustres who 
are the first at his side and parts of his body, see [C.] 6, q. 1 [c. 22] 
para. s/ quis, or the expectabiles in a second intermediate group, or the 
clarissimi, the senators of the lowest group below which there is no 
grade in the senatorial class,’ see [c.] 2 q. 6 [c. 28], Anteriorum, Ilud 
etiam. On the ordering of these offices, consult the Digest. 
471. In the first rank are the kings and the electors of the empire, 
the patricians. In the second are the dukes, governors, prefects, and 
others of this sort. In the third are the marquises, landgraves, and 
others of equal rank. Those who are over the rest and in more direct 
contact with the emperor compose the imperial body, the head of 
which is the emperor himself. When they meet in one representative 
'Book u1, ch. 6, nos. 85-86. 
“Isidore, Etymologies, 1X, 4, 12 (PL 82, p. 349). 
5 Digest, 1, 9-19. 
283 


[PDF page 336]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
group, the whole empire is assembled, as the Lev Julia proves which is 
reproduced in the Decretum at [C.] 6 q. 1 [c. 22] Si quis cum militibus 
where it is referred to as Ad legem Juliam maiestatis, C. 1, Quisquis. See 
also the text of the Eighth Council cited above, chapter 17, where it 
says, “Since princes often hold meetings for their purposes .. .””* 
472. And because universal decrees for the good of the empire 
should be made by consent, and also so that a law applying to the 
whole empire may not be in opposition to that of any part, and in 
order to give adequate notice of this, the aforesaid leading princes and 
other most trustworthy sworn representatives meet to demonstrate to 
all on the basis of their certain knowledge what actions are appropri- 
ate to the time and place. In this way the decisions made after careful 
consideration will be accepted and strictly observed. | have discovered 
in ancient books that universal councils of the empire used to be held 
in which the princes personally signed their names after that of the 
emperor as a lasting guarantee, in the same way as was customary in 
church councils. 
473. I have also read that a council was held at Cologne by King 
Dagobert and twenty-four princes in which many matters essential for 
the preservation of justice and peace were determined with the con- 
sent of all. | have also read the laws of Charlemagne which were 
issued in consultation with the faithful, as the text [C.] 11 q. 1 [c. 37] 
Quicumque, para. Volumus, demonstrates, and I have studied those of 
Childebert and others.” The universal council examined, coordin- 
ated, and revised the laws when necessary and made additions, adopt- 
ing different laws for different parts of our empire, for the Alemanni 
different laws from the Baiuvarii (whom we now call Bavarians), and 
for the Riparian Franks different laws from those for the Burgundians 
and Lombards, and it issued other laws which it called the Salic laws 
for the Saxons and the people of those regions. 
474. Ihave seen these laws collected in order and I know many of 
them well, especially the more important ones the formulas of which 
are in use among the people because of their ancient origin, especially 
in rural courts rather than in the towns and cities where municipal 
ordinances are perhaps superseding them. 
*Mansi 16, p. 171. 
>Einhard, Vita Caroli (Life of Charlemagne), ch. 29, does not mention the Council of King 
Dagobert. The laws of Childebert are mentioned by the Council of Turin, A.D. 567 
(MG Concilia, 1, p. 130). 
284 


[PDF page 337]
Book Ll, para. 4&1 
475. Ihave read that the ancient kings used to hold these councils 
which are called assemblies [conventus| once or twice a year for the 
public good in different cities of the empire.® The strictest penalties 
were imposed in these councils on all who disturbed the peace or 
violated the public law, especially perjurors and those who broke their 
word. And out of fear of these meetings, to which those who were 
called were obliged to come by an oath sworn to the empire, 
individual violations of fealty, pillage, and arson were not committed. 
476. No one could avoid or reject the decision of that assembly and 
the emperor and the assembly demanded that the sentences imposed 
there be carried out by force of arms on those who did not obey. 
477. The principal members of that council are those who are 
called the princes of the empire, whether they are bishops, or laymen, 
or abbots. But unless they were especially summoned, others did not 
participate in this council. At the end of the conventus when everything 
had been taken care of, the time and place of another future meeting 
was set. It was of course always in the power of the emperor to change 
the time and place if there were good reasons to do so. There was no 
better nor more useful arrangement for the good of the whole church 
— and not only for those living under the empire. 
478. The legates of the Roman pontiff used to come for cases 
involving the church and those of other kings for difficult matters 
arising in their kingdoms, and useful counsel was given for all public 
needs. | think that nothing could be more useful for public order than 
the reintroduction of this holy practice. 
479. Ihave also read that in order to give it the greatest strength 
what was decided in this way in common council would be subscribed 
to and signed with a cross by the hand of everyone present. This 
custom resulted from the provision of the law that if anyone ever 
attempted to violate a law which he had subscribed to, and signed 
with his own hand, he would be disgraced and automatically deprived 
of every honor as one who was untrue to himself and his own pledge. 
480. This was the practice of the ancients, as will be evident to 
anyone who has tirelessly perused the acts of kings and emperors and 
the above mentioned statutes adopted at their meetings. 
481. Ido not insist on speaking at length on the internal organiza- 
tion of that assembly. It follows the order of seating of the electors 
© Hinemar of Rheims, De ordine palatii, c. 29 (PL. 125, p. 1003). 
285 


[PDF page 338]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
established by Charles IV of happy memory in his Golden Bull at the 
meeting at Metz.’ The other princes know their places according to 
rank and age. But when the princes are present, let each one speak 
out freely and openly when asked, and swear to seek faithfully what 
will best aid the empire and the commonwealth in a given case in 
accordance with the dictates of their consciences and free of all base 
motives. These and other things are clear by analogy with what is 
written above. 
7 The Golden Bull on the procedure for the election of the emperor was adopted in 1356. 
GHAP TE RSV 
ON DHE PROURTSHING SEAT E OR Hib r MPR Ey Adds 
THE DIME WHEN EVERY BP PORD WAS TATNIE DD rAg i rib 
INGREASEVOP DHE PAIDHY AND EAWS HAD ST RIGD 
BINDING EPPECT. 
482. The last section of this part is the most difficult of all since we 
are investigating things based on actual experience rather than simply 
in books. First we will examine the state of the empire at its prime so 
that we can measure against this the excesses of today and the degree 
of its decline. After this we should use our intelligence to suggest and 
describe healthful remedies drawn principally from what was done in 
the past so that at the very least, better solutions can gradually be 
discovered through the use of logical inference. 
483. The first point is known to those who are acquainted with the 
brilliant accomplishments of the emperors who established the 
foundations of the government of this noble Germany. In order not to 
have to go back in the remote past to the first great universal 
emperors, since our reforming effort cannot reach such a high degree 
now, let us pass them over and begin with Otto I. We read that he was 
the first emperor to whom true imperial authority was transferred 
without limit or condition on him and his successors, both by the 
Roman senate and the whole people and by the pope and his council. 
For at that time the Western Empire was so shaken by various invad- 
ing tyrants that he would not accept the office of emperor when it was 
offered except on the understanding that he would be able to hold the 
286 


[PDF page 339]
Book III, para. 487 
empire in perpetuity and could restore everything taken away from 
the Roman church.’ When by divine assistance this was done exactly 
as Otto desired, all the [imperial] domains came one by one into his 
power — the kingdom of Italy and the Lombards, the kingdom of 
Burgundy’ — he already had the kingdom of the Germans of which his 
father, Henry, is supposed to have been the first king. 
484. Some authorities think that Otto II, son of Otto’s second wife 
who was the daughter of the king of Burgundy, acquired the kingdom 
of Burgundy by inheritance, but it suffices for our purpose to know 
that our empire is composed of the kingdoms and dominions listed 
above and they have maintained fidelity and loyalty to it. 
485. Also we find that after this the Hungarians of the Catholic 
faith, the Bohemians, the Danes, the Norwegians, the Poles, the 
Prussians, and other important provinces were subject to our rulers. 
The greatest concern of all the emperors was the protection and 
expansion of the faith. 
486. And the emperors exercised genuine governing authority 
because the voice of the emperor was supported by power and force. 
Even the most important person could not transgress the law with 
impunity. Unless a law retains its sanction and its punitive force it 
becomes blunted and falls into disuse. Man’s appetite for evil must be 
controlled by the bridle of the law and restrained by its limitations. 
Law without coercion has no sanction and loses its effectiveness. It no 
more merits to be called a law than a corpse should be called a man. 
But at that time the laws were strong, the imperial statutes were 
feared, and large annual meetings of the princes were held so that the 
severity of the law might be strengthened by constant enforcement so 
that no transgressor of the law, no matter how powerful, went 
unpunished. 
487. It was necessary not to allow exceptions to the sentence not 
only of the emperor but of all the princes, even when imposed on 
parents or close friends. Because of the oath sworn to the empire, no 
one in the meeting when asked could do other than approve and 
praise the existing law and follow it in passing judgment if applicable, 
even against one’s own son. But according to the law a decision to be 
adopted and put into effect had to be unanimous. Thus a legal 
sanction had impartial effect on the basis of common agreement. And 
'Liutprand of Cremona, Historia Ottonis (MG Scriptores 1, p. 340). 
* Burgundy was not part of Otto I’s empire. 
287 


[PDF page 340]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
no one could freely transgress it with impunity. This produced 
general peace and a happy fatherland. 
CHAPTER XXVIII 
THE COMMAND OF OTTO II ON THE GRANT OF 
TEMPORAL POSSESSIONS TO THE CHURCH WAS 
MADE FOR WORTHY REASONS. 
488. Later Otto II, since he had only one son, thought that it would 
be difficult to keep the peace for long in so many kingdoms without 
the greatest effort. Since he wished to follow in the footsteps of his 
grandfather, Henry I, and of his father, Otto, he directed his thoughts 
to church matters and observed that the many properties given to the 
church by past kings enjoyed great peace, for it was considered 
shameful to use force against things dedicated to God. He pondered 
in his heart the decree of the holy council of the Roman church which 
is quoted in [D.] 63 [c. 23] /n synodo by which perpetual authority was 
granted to the emperors to grant investiture to the Roman pontiff and 
to all the bishops in the empire, or at least that they [the emperors] 
should always give their consent to any canonical election, as D. 63 [c. 
34] Nos sanctorum [Sacrorum canonum| says. 
489. ‘Therefore when he considered this he concluded that peace 
could be guaranteed for all time to the subjects of the emperor if 
temporal domains were given to the Roman and other churches in 
return for the performance of certain services. For he thought that 
divine worship would be increased and religion greatly honored if the 
most powerful of the holy bishops were associated with the other 
princes. Then no longer would everyone exercise his will for sinful 
purposes. He hoped that public crimes such as the ravaging or 
decimating of rural areas or disturbances of public order or arson or 
similar crimes would not be committed if the holy power of the 
church was able and willing to resist. Robbers and oppressors of the 
poor who ruled over a particular government could be corrected, he 
thought, and thus the people could live free from tyrannical oppres- 
sion in an empire at peace. 
490. He did not doubt that this arrangement would be most useful if 
288 


[PDF page 341]
Book III, para. 491 
the status of the empire were maintained by duties of annual service 
and appointed aids assigned to each church in accordance with the 
size of its temporal possessions.' Also the power of the empire would 
grow much greater because only the emperor would make appoint- 
ments over the areas given to the church, and this would be without a 
hereditary succession, and if a churchman did not live a holy and 
canonical life he would be deposed by action of the other bishops 
after accusation by the emperor or synod.’ Thus those temporal 
possessions did not seem to leave the hands of the emperor, since in 
this way they remained under his control to the great profit of the 
commonwealth. 
'From Otto II the bishops and abbots began to be incorporated into the feudal hierarchy 
of the empire as direct vassals of the emperor. 
Mansi 18, pp. 320 and 499. 
CHAPTER XXVIII 
ATSPIRS? PRIN GESTAND DUKES WHO GOVERNED GEE 
SUBJEGTRS7OF DHE EMPIRE WERE TEMPORARY 
APPOINTEES: -LALER SLHEY WERE GONSDIGRULED AS 
BEUDAL VASSALS POR G OOD GAUSS BIE DHEY GAVE 
THE EMPIRE AN ANNUAL TRIBUTE AND MILITARY 
SERVIGE.GUSDOMS=-DUTITES. MAxESt ANDETALDAGE'S 
WENDT TOl THE GCOMMONWEAMIEE, UNDE DHE 
EMPEROR PROTECTED THAT COMMONWEALTH 
WITH A PROFESSIONAL ARMY. 
491. It was also decreed at that time that princes, dukes, and counts 
should be appointed to public office at the command of the emperor 
and should be removable at his will with an obligation to give an 
account of their ministry to the public treasury. Later, because the 
sons of the senators although they first were to be knights finally 
became members of the senate, the practice was introduced that the 
sons of parents who had properly carried out the duties of their 
offices, would inherit those offices. This was done so that the fathers 
would be less avaricious than if they were not certain who would 
succeed them in office, and also because subjects would be less likely 
289 


[PDF page 342]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
to be oppressed by a father whose children were to rule over them. 
Nevertheless to avoid an unfavorable reduction in the domains of his 
imperial highness in the future as a result of the increase in the power 
of those office-holders, feudal statutes were introduced as well as 
strict oaths of fealty which were to be sworn by every new vassal and 
strictly observed under pain of losing the fief. 
492. Finally another law was published that no one could succeed to 
several large fiefs at the same time.! This was done to avoid an 
increase in the power of any subject through the accumulation of 
many large fiefs to the point that, out of tyrannical fury and forgetful 
of his oaths, he might seek to achieve the supreme power — the desire 
for which grows as one acquires more — and weaken the empire 
through rebellion and disturbance. 
493. In addition it was customary for the emperors to listen readily 
to accusations of the violation of trust and the breaking of oaths. Thus 
the fidelity which alone holds an empire together was never neglected. 
The punishment for the breaking of trust was confiscation. Then to 
prevent envy from perhaps inciting nobles of the same family against 
someone to whom the confiscated property was given, the holy 
emperors often gave the church the properties that had been con- 
fiscated in this way. 
494. The emperors wisely established many similar worthy arrange- 
ments for the good of the commonwealth and the holy empire. For 
instance they created courts presided over by justices of the peace 
who passed sentence on the basis of decisions by popular juries which 
had duly sworn to decide according to their consciences and the 
merits of the case — thus it was not in the power of the presiding judge 
to punish those under him at will on the basis of his personal feelings. 
This was also true in all other cases involving financial affairs, tal- 
lages, and customs. 
495. And everything tended to the public good. At that time the 
emperor had the public responsibility to maintain the peace, and he 
had an army paid for by the public for this purpose.” Everywhere he 
was feared by princes and rulers; everywhere he was worshipped, 
venerated and loved by the people as the defender of the fatherland, 
the protector of liberty, the relief of the oppressed, and the most 
‘Large fiefs included those belonging to dukes, margraves, and counts. The law against 
accumulation of large fiefs was regularly violated. 
*-The imperial army was based on feudal service, not regular payment. 
290 


[PDF page 343]
Book III, para. 497 
rigorous prosecutor of those who disturbed the commonwealth. At 
that time an offense against him was one committed against the 
highest public power and this was the greatest crime because it was 
committed against the father of his country and of all its inhabitants. 
But if | wrote down everything that is worth relating I would be more 
prolix than needed for our purpose. 
CLAP Aly EE REE NOX TN 
TODAYS DE EMP LREVEVAS DIS CONTINUE DM EE Sip 
PRAGTIGES AND GREAT ABUSES, HAVE BEEN 
INTRODUCED. THE ROMAN CURIA IS RESPONSIBLE 
HORA E EMP DYUNGIOP Tit PUBLIC TREASURY AND 
THE PRESENT DISORDER IN THE ADMINISTRATION 
OFe BHP EME ORE PO WE Reo HH EGE GE AES © 
HURTS THE COMMONWEALTH. 
496. Observe how far the present state of the government has 
departed from this, since hardly any of these practices are observed. 
All concern for the commonwealth has disappeared. The bridle is 
slackened and anyone violates the law with impunity. Where once 
there was veneration in fear and trembling, now there is disdain and 
contempt. The laws are enforced with weapons that are like 
spiderwebs which can hardly restrain a tiny locust. In the past the laws 
were like strong nets always tensed for wild boars, ready to limit 
concupiscence and to restrain troublesome transgressors. Now 
everyone is concerned with his personal advantage. There is no con- 
cern for one’s neighbor or with the future because of the lack of 
interest by the emperors who think that good intentions are enough to 
restore or reform what has gone awry. All sanctions have ceased to 
operate. Rebels are not punished. And many tyrannous princes grow 
powerful while the empire declines. 
497. What good are the temporal possessions of the church to the 
commonwealth? What good are they to the empire? What good to its 
subjects? Little or none. Otto commanded in D. 63 [c. 23] /n synodo 
that bishops should be invested with their bishoprics without charge. 
We see that the pope has not only taken free investiture away from the 
291 


[PDF page 344]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
emperor, but so much money is charged that everyone in Germany is 
crushed with a burden that is not merely heavy but overwhelming. 
Today ambitious bishops have a fierce appetite for the temporal 
possessions attached to the domains of the church so that we see them 
do outright after their appointment, what they did in circuitous ways 
before. All of their concern is with temporals, none with spirituals. 
This was not the intention of the emperors. They did not want 
spiritual concerns to be absorbed in the temporal possessions which 
they gave to the churches for their betterment. 
498. And, alas, all these things are the result of the violation of 
order. Because the canons are not observed, there is no coercion, no 
discipline, and no punishment. Furthermore the temporal power of 
the ecclesiastics now causes great harm to the commonwealth and its 
subjects. When there is a vacancy in a church office there is always 
danger of schism or the people must be taxed more heavily than 
others under secular rulers because if it is filled by election, rivalry 
produces a division in the voting and if it goes to the papal curia, the 
one who offers the most money wins out.! 
499. And all these burdens are laid on the poor subjects. The curia 
attracts whatever wealth there is. And what the empire granted and 
decreed in a holy fashion for the worship of God and the public good, 
is entirely perverted by avarice and greed through specious reasoning 
and novel interpretations, and what was imperial is papal and the 
spiritual becomes the temporal. 
"Nicholas is speaking from personal knowledge of the election of the Prince-Bishop of 
Trier. 
CUEEA PAE ERS XOXOX. 
THE EMPEROR WHO HAS SOLE ADMINISTRATION 
OVER IMPERIAL MATTERS IS OFTEN IMPROPERLY 
LIMITED BY AGREEMENTS AND OATHS MADE TO 
THE ELECTORS IN ORDER TO GET THEIR SUPPORT. 
THESE SHOULD BE INVALID AND WE OBJECT 
SHOU Gye Omit E its = PERV AU Gre liGn Hie 
500. ‘There is another practice which is destructive of the empire. 
Although the emperor alone governs for the good of the com- 
292 


[PDF page 345]
Book ITI, para. 503 
monwealth, he often acquires his office through agreements with 
electors who seek their own interest, and because of an oath that he 
has sworn, he does not dare to try to regain the things belonging to the 
empire which have been taken in violation of law, nor to remove the 
customs duties that burden the commonwealth, nor to make other 
useful laws.’ He is prevented from revoking the things which were 
unwisely given or promised by his predecessors without a meeting of 
all, out of inordinate love or affection or blood relationship. And so it 
happens that as the electors seek their own interest, they abuse the 
power entrusted to them and thus convert the power which was given 
to them for the good of the empire into its destruction. 
501. Because the electors should not permit the emperors to sur- 
render imperial rights to the prejudice of the empire, they should 
always help him to increase his power. But because they have made 
him promise not to take away what was given or promised to them at 
some point in a false manner by relatives or parents who ruled over 
the empire, they keep silent when they see the emperor do the same 
thing [with others] — so as not to condemn their own actions. 
502. O how blind they are! The princes should not think that they 
can become rich from the goods of the empire and possess them for 
long. If the empire comes to nothing because all are trying to increase 
their holdings, what will follow but the destruction of everyone? 
Without a greater power in the empire to preserve the peace, increas- 
ing envy and greed will produce wars and divisions and then like every 
kingdom divided against itself,*> what has been brought together 
unjustly will collapse. 
503. And so the princes of the empire are mistaken when they take 
over imperial possessions everywhere in order to become more 
powerful and stronger, because once the members have dismembered 
and weakened the entire power of the empire and its head, the 
hierarchical order will cease to exist. There will be no head to whom 
one can appeal. And where there is no order, there is confusion. And 
where there is confusion, no one is safe. And so when the nobles are 
fighting among themselves, the people will rise up to seek justice 
through their own arms. Then, as the princes destroy the empire, the 
people will destroy the princes. 
"Nicholas is referring to the “capitulations,” agreed to by the emperor before his election. 
* Matthew 12:25; Luke 11:7. 
293 


[PDF page 346]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
CHAPTER XXX] 
THE EMPIRE IS IN SERIOUS DECLINE BECAUSE 
JUSTICE NO LONGER REIGNS. FORCE AND SELF- 
WILL, BETRAYAL OF FEUDAL LOYALTY, BURNING 
AND RAPINE DEVASTATE THE COMMONWEALTH. WE 
PROTEST AGAINST THOSE WHO SAY THAT IT IS 
HONORABLE TO TAKE PROPERTY IN VIOLATION OF 
JUSTICE. 
504. In addition we see great confusion or a complete lack of justice 
in the judicial sphere. Today honor has been separated from legality. 
And the nobles say that they can licitly occupy vast domains which 
they admit they have not had, and do not have any legal right to 
possess. Through the base practice of the breaking of fealty [diffidatio] 
they think that they can protect their honor. After that so-called 
breaking of fealty on the basis of some fabricated reason or none at 
all, they think that property seized by force either openly or secretly is 
somehow legally in their possession, even when it belongs to the 
church or the clergy. What presumptuous audacity against all law and 
right! What iniquitous reasoning which separates the honorable from 
the just and says that property unjustly seized can be held with honor. 
Roman law wisely decreed that every breaking of fealty without the 
consent of the highest judge would be both dishonorable and unjust, 
and those who seized the goods of their enemies in this way would be 
robbers, see [Digest xL1x 15] De captivis et postliminio redemptis [1.24] 
Hostes. On this subject, see [c.] 23 q. 2 c. 1 and many other chapters 
mentioned by Hostiensis in his Summa [1] De Treuga et Pace [C. 3 4] 
and by Innocent [IV] in the chapter [c. 12] Olim of [Decretals 11 13] De 
restitutione spoliorum and the doctors cited there. 
505. Besides it is clear that the goods of the church do not belong to 
any prelate or cleric and for that reason a crime by a prelate cannot 
result in a loss to the church. How, O nobleman, do you think that it is 
honorable to break fealty to a cleric, or a religious convent, or a 
prelate? Who is so senseless as to admit that it is honorable to do what 
cannot be done without major excommunication and sacrilege? If you, 
a layman, are prohibited by divine law from seizing and mistreating a 
cleric on your own authority, what virtue do you think there is in a 
294 


[PDF page 347]
Book III, para. 508 
falsified document of breach of fealty? Do you think that all divine and 
human laws cease to be operative once you publish a little document? 
Thus if the goods of the church cannot be seized or taken away by 
force by a layman without committing sacrilege, do you think that this 
sacrilege is licit? This great and manifest error has, alas, recently 
infested parts of Germany. God is offended by it and the public peace 
and all stability disturbed. 
506. Who can describe in detail all the abuses which have been 
iniquitously introduced in our time and still more iniquitously 
defended? And all this is because the laws and canons have lost their 
vigor and there are none to act as guardians and executors and 
pastors. 
CHAPTER XXXII 
ALD MUSTOUIC KEY SBE GIVEN) TO) THE EMPIRE 
WHIGHIS MORAL DY ThE WHAT THE EMPEROR: 
SHOULD DO AND PROPOSE IN ORDER TO BRING 
ABOUT REFORM. 
507. Appropriate measures must be taken soon against the dis- 
orders and perils besetting the commonwealth that are discussed 
above. A mortal disease has invaded the German empire and unless 
an antidote is found at once, death will surely follow. You will seek the 
empire in Germany and will not find it. As a result others will take our 
place and we will be divided and subjected to another nation. And 
there is no better approach to reform than through the well-worn and 
proven ways of the ancients to which we must return. 
508. The fundamental reform is to establish annual general meet- 
ings and to begin here in this holy Council of Basel and make it a rule 
for the future.' And so let the most pious emperor take action, as he 
has always shown himself most diligent to do, and order all the greater 
princes of the empire from both estates to come together at his sacred 
command. Let him earnestly set forth the lamentably diminished state 
of the empire. Let him indicate what remains in Italy or in Lombardy 
'An annual meeting was called for by the Golden Bull (1356). 
295 


[PDF page 348]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
of the [once] flourishing laws of the empire. Let him add what 
survives in the kingdom of Arles and throughout the whole of Ger- 
many. And when he has indicated the miserable state of this once 
flourishing and powerful empire let him predict what will happen next 
unless a remedy is applied. Let him seek a remedy from those who 
were and are most faithful and who are bound to this by desire and 
oath. 
509. With the provident assistance of His Imperial Highness a 
proper arrangement should be made for a successor. 
CHAR TE Re xexe HL 
FIRST AN ANNUAL MEETING SHOULD BE ORDERED 
AND JUDGES SHOULDSBE APPOINTED IN THE 
PROVINGES = INSRAGH PROVIN GE. LARD UDG ES 
SHOWED Vib Baie ROME Hike TulRE Eel SleAw ES sc— dette: 
CHURGH Y THE INO BIE! DY. AN Dich bb O Py En lel 
GHARTER DES GRIBES EHOW THEeSHOULDETRRY 
CASES. 
510. And because after so great a decline the empire cannot be 
restored to its original healthy state, provision should be made for 
recovery. First annual imperial councils and [a system of] justice 
should be provided for. Indeed I find that Constantine the Great, as 
will be indicated in a certain text below, provided for this kind of 
meeting and [established] judges in Gaul.’ For it was after the 
imperial courts and meetings ceased, that nearly all the abuses were 
introduced. 
511. And so it seems that it should be ordained that twelve or more 
courts are to be established in this way throughout the provinces 
subject to the empire. Each court is to be composed of three judges 
corresponding to the three social classes — nobles, clerics, and people. 
Those judges should be able to judge appeals in all cases arising 
in their assigned territories between any persons — including 
ecclesiastics — concerning their temporal possessions subject to the 
' Book 111, nos. 520-526. 
296 


[PDF page 349]
Book III, para. 514 
empire — by way of appeal from their own superiors or as a court of 
first instance only if the plaintiff or defendant does not have a superior 
— because, for example, he is a prince, or if his superior is suspected 
of being favorable to the other side. And a case which was introduced 
by way of appeal, would be terminated with the decision of that court. 
What has come to it as a court of first instance could be appealed to 
the next meeting [of the Reichstag] if it is a serious matter or between 
important men. Each judge should pronounce sentence and call upon 
the disputants according to their status, the noble upon the nobles, 
the churchman upon the churchmen, and the representative of the 
people upon the people. However no final decision should be adopted 
without the deliberation of all three together, and in difficult cases let 
them get the advice of experts. But if one [of the three] disagrees with 
the other two, the opinion of the majority should prevail. 
512. Also those judges should have the power to put their sentences 
into execution by the ban,” and the secular arm, and the payment of 
fines and punishments into the public treasury. 
513. A salary should be given to those judges and all other public 
officials from the public treasury so that they may swear to observe the 
text of Ad legem Iuliam repetundarum, which is repeated in canon law in 
[C.] 1 q. 7 [c. 26] Sancimus. 
ve - . . . . 
“The ban was a solemn curse, formally invoked by ecclesiastical authority. 
CHAPTER XXXIV 
UNDER PAIN OF PUNISHMENT FOR THEFT AND 
ROBBERY, NO ONE SHOULD BE ALLOWED TO TAKE 
THE PROPER DY OB ANOTHERIESGEPT BY jUDICEAL 
PROCESS. 4° LAW ON THIS SUBJEGT SHOULD BE 
IS UBD IWITDH LEESCON SEND OR ALT UN: DEE 
IMPERIAL COUNCIL, AND SIGNED AND SEALED IN 
THE PROVINCES: 
514. Anda law should be adopted that under penalty of punishment 
for theft and robbery no one is to be permitted for any reason to seize 
on his own authority the property of another by force or to impose 
297 


[PDF page 350]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
punishment on him or his possessions by means of the breaking of 
fealty. Rather everything should be done by the authority of judges 
who can authorize reprisals against anyone who resists their sentence. 
For he who takes the sword on his own authority is to be killed by the 
sword, see [C.] 23 q. 1, para. 1. Anyone who wages war without the 
order of the prince is bound by the provisions of the [Code] Lex Julia 
after [1x 8], Ad Legem Iuliam maiestatis 1.3 [1.5] and Authentica [Novel- 
lae 17| De mandato principis, coll. 3 and [Novellae 85] De armis, coll. 6, 
although in a case of imminent necessity the authorization of the chief 
officer is sufficient, see Code De fabricensibus, the final law [1.7] of 
Book x. 
515. But if anyone dares to violate this law, let him be brought 
before any court in a village or city and punished for theft and 
robbery. If perhaps the court where he is apprehended is unwilling or 
neglects to do this when it could have conveniently done so, let the 
property of those judges be automatically confiscated. 
516. Similarly if anyone receives those criminals [lit. — assassins] he 
ought to be treated as a public enemy and his possessions can be 
seized without hesitation, as Hostiensis notes in his Summa [1], De 
Treuga et Pace, para. 3, v. Sed et si. 
517. But this law should be adopted by the common consent of all 
and signed and sent to the provinces to be received and sealed and a 
copy kept in the province and the original with the seal of the province 
should be sent back to the chancery of the empire so as to confirm the 
agreement of all in this way. That law should also be signed and 
sealed by all the princes meeting together and with it another law 
which warns that anyone — whether a prince or anyone else — who acts 
contrary to his own signature on his own authority without the 
permission of the judges and the emperor, has passed the judgment of 
public disgrace upon himself by that act, and is deprived of every 
honor. If he is a prince, the emperor is to have it in his power to seize 
all his goods for his treasury, but if he is a layman, they are to be 
automatically confiscated; if he is a clergyman, he is to be deposed by 
a council of the clergy and at the same time he is to be automatically 
deprived of the administration of temporals and the judges are to 
appoint a temporal administrator who is removable at the ruler’s will. 
518. ‘This law should be signed by everyone along with the others. 
And the imperial records should keep these signatures so that any 
transgressor can be convicted by them. And a rigorous judicial system 
298 


[PDF page 351]
Book III, para. 521 
cannot be properly introduced unless in this or a similar way acts of 
violence [via facti] and the breaking of fealty are eliminated by com- 
mon consent. 
CHAPTER XXXV 
THE ORDER FOR THE ANNUAL MEETING SHOULD 
FOLLOW THE EXAMPLE OF THOSE FOR EARLIER 
MEETINGS. THE EXAMPLE OF AN ORDER BY AN 
EMPEROR IN GAUL, WHOM SOME SAY WAS 
CONSTANTINE, IS QUOTED AND SHOULD BE 
NOTED. IN THIS MEETING WHAT IS OF PUBLIC AND 
GENERALAINTE RE Sie INGA i ber ROVUNGIAT 
PRACTICES AND JUDICIAL DECISIONS SHOULD BE 
REV LEW DAN DURE GUIEATE D 
51g. The annual meeting should be set for about the feast of Pente- 
cost, in Frankfurt, which seems to be the most suitable place from its 
situation and from other circumstances. All the judges and electors of 
the empire should come in person to this meeting without pomp or 
heavy expense. The lord emperor himself should preside, if he can be 
present in person; otherwise, the chief of the electors should do so in 
the emperor’s name. The affairs of the empire and even local affairs 
that have come before the judges should be dealt with; and what 
needs reforming should be reformed. If a critical matter of business 
really demands that a plenary meeting of all the princes take place 
there or elsewhere, whatever is most suitable should be done. 
520. However the regular annual council of the lord judges, and 
electors at which cases involving the princes are decided through a 
common vote should never be omitted. And since it is useful to 
introduce reform on the basis of concrete examples, I would submit 
an imperial letter which is attributed to Constantine, who ordered a 
similar meeting of judges to be held at Arles. Arles, however, was 
called the city of Constantine [Constantiniana]. 
521. The imperial order, Saluberrima, which was directed to the 
illustrious Agricola, the prefect of Gaul, begins in the following way: 
“Following the most useful suggestion of Your Magnificence con- 
299 


[PDF page 352]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
cerning what is to be done in our seven provinces that will be advanta- 
geous to the commonwealth, by our everlasting authority we issue the 
decree awaited by the inhabitants of those provinces. Both private and 
public reasons, the interest of property-holders as well as the public 
purpose, demand a meeting of the magistrates or their representatives 
from the individual cities — not merely from the various provinces. 
Therefore we consider it especially opportune and expedient that 
henceforth the seven provinces, should hold a council, perhaps every 
year at an appointed time in the metropolitan city, that is, in the city of 
Arles, in which we will take public counsel on both specific and 
general questions. If arrangements can be made for this meeting of 
leaders and for your presence as prefect, their advice on individual 
matters can be very useful. Therefore, what is discussed and decided 
along with the reasons for it should be made known to the more 
important provinces, since it is equally necessary to maintain equi- 
table and just procedures for those who are not present. 
522. “Besides responding to the needs of government we believe 
that holding the council every year in the city of Constantiniana 
[Arles] makes personal contact easier. For it is so well-located, com- 
merce so flourishes there, and there is so much traffic in foodstuffs 
that products of other regions are easily brought there. No other 
province enjoys the fertility that the soil of Arles seems to have. 
Indeed anything outstanding that the wealth of the Orient and per- 
fumed Arabia, the delicacies of Assyria, the fertility of Africa, the 
beauty of Spain, or the strength of Gaul can possess seems to abound 
there, as if everything that is marvelous elsewhere were produced 
there. The southern flow of the Rhone and the northern flow of the 
nearby Durance are necessary and bring hither whatever the one or 
the other flows by or around. 
523. Since whatever agricultural products may be useful for that 
city are brought there by sail, oar, wagon, land, sea, and river, how can 
anyone not think that much has been given to our Gaul when we 
command that the council be held in a city which, as if by divine gift, 
has so many conveniences and so many opportunities for commerce? 
524. “Even if the illustrious prefect, Petronius, acting on the basis 
of wise and proven advice has already commanded that this should be 
done, we decree that if it has been left undone because of neglect over 
time or the inaction of tyrants, this should be remedied by our 
customary authority, O dear and loving relative, Agricola. 
300 


[PDF page 353]
Book III, para. 530 
525. “Hence following this order of ours and the earlier directions 
of the prior occupant of your office, Your Illustrious Magnificence is 
to see to it that the magistrates, property holders, and judges of each 
of the seven provinces know that a council will take place each year in 
the city of Arles from the Ides of August without interruption until the 
Ides of September. If business detains the judges in Narbonne and 
Outer Aquitaine, which are more distant provinces, they should know 
that representatives are to be sent as is customary. We know that this 
provision will be most welcome to the citizens of our provinces, and 
that it will add no little to the prestige of the city of Arles to whose 
fidelity we owe much, according to the testimony and judgment of our 
relative and patrician. 
526. “Your Excellency should know that the judges are to be fined 
five pounds of gold, the magistrates and courtiers [curiales| three 
pounds, if they delay in coming to the appointed place at the 
established time.” 
527. This is the suggestion to Agricola — that the council be re- 
established that had been held in the past each year, because it was 
very useful for the provinces. Note that it is to be held in the city of 
Arles which at that time was the capital of Gaul and belongs to our 
[German] empire, although it does not recognize this. We should also 
observe that not only the [provincial] judges but also the magistrates 
or their representatives were to come from the individual cities. 
Observe too that it lasted a whole month and that they were strictly 
obligated to come under pain of serious penalty. 
528. Following this form, an annual council should be established 
in Frankfurt (which, by reason of its location and the convergence of 
commerce there, may properly be likened to Arles), to be held for at 
least the month of either May or September; and along with those 
mentioned above, at least one representative should come from each 
city and metropolis and from the large imperial fortified towns. 
529. ‘The prince electors should bring with them anyone whom they 
wish as counsellors and nobles. And all should be bound by oath to 
contribute their counsel for the public good, according to the right 
judgment of reason. 
530. Provincial customs should be examined there and harmonized 
'Letter of Honorius and Theodosius to Agricola (printed in G. Haenal, Corpus legum, 
Leipzig, 1845, no. 1171, pp. 238ff.). In an earlier draft, an excerpt from this decree 
appears in Book 1, ch. 7 (see above, no. 96a). See Introduction. 
301 


[PDF page 354]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
as nearly as possible with the common practice; and in particular 
captious formulae should be completely abolished; for the simple 
poor are often most unfairly led astray by the quibbles of lawyers over 
the use of the wrong legal forms, and so lose their whole case, since 
“the who omits a syllable loses the case,” as I have often seen happen 
in the diocese of Trier. 
531. Finally, evil practices such as permitting sworn statements 
against anyone and allowing an unlimited number of witnesses should 
be abolished. Throughout Germany there are innumerable such evil 
practices that are against true justice and even encourage criminality. 
Therefore judges of the provinces ought to come together and put the 
customary practice of their provinces into writing and lay them out 
before the council, so that they may be examined. And a similar 
procedure should be employed for other defects of the law. 
CHAPTER XXXVI 
A STRICT FORM SHOULD BE IMPOSED ON THE 
ELECTORS OF THE EMPIRE WHO HAY E THE POWER 
DOO PLECT THheEMPEROR., PN DIGATING HOW DEY 
ARE, TPO PROCEED WHEN THERE IS A VAGANCY IN 
ALEVE BMP DRUGS 
532. Finally, this holy imperial Council of Basel should take the 
greatest care to see that the electors of the holy empire are given a 
strict and inviolable electoral procedure. In particular it should bind 
them under oath to choose the emperor without consideration of 
personal benefit or special interest, purely and simply for the public 
good and for the preservation and honor of the holy empire, before 
God and their consciences. If anyone is found acting otherwise, he 
should be subjected to perpetual disgrace and to the penalties for the 
crime of treason. 
533. Itis urgently necessary that the electors should be threatened 
with most severe penalties in order to maintain the purity of the 
elections because of the absurd and dishonest practices which, I have 
read, have occurred in the past. When the electors look out for their 
own interests using illicit procedures to bind the one to be elected, the 
302 


[PDF page 355]
Book III, para. 536 
public interest is entirely neglected. Because, it is said, certain elec- 
tors control towns and forts in the empire, and, because of customs 
revenues and other special interests of this sort, shamefully corrupt 
elections are often carried out involving iniquitous agreements. 
534. Above all, any controversy that makes electors fear that they 
will lose what they have had for some time which motivates them to 
act in this way ought to be settled in a general meeting through 
genuine and honest discussion, so that thus each elector may act 
freely in an honest election. And since he who seems best by common 
decision of all the electors ought to be placed over the empire, | shall 
now describe a plan that will be useful in this matter, as well as in any 
council or assembly in which a common decision is to be made with 
the votes of all. This plan is as follows: 
GHAR TE Rex IT 
A SYSTEM OF VOTING IS DESCRIBED WHICH THEY 
CANSUSED Li lS MAePER PR GLEY GOOD AND TWUSEE ULE, 
hes LED AN DOP RAG I GAL WiAYed OFF ROCHE ED: 
535- The electors of the holy empire, when they wish to proceed to 
the election of the next emperor, should assemble on an appointed 
day in all humility and with the utmost devotion to the service of God 
and free of all sin, so that Christ the Lord may be in their midst and 
they may receive the grace of the Holy Spirit. After the solemn 
introduction of the order of business, they should consider the many 
persons who, because of their outward or inner qualifications for rule, 
may be worthy of such a great office. So that the election may be 
carried out without fear and in complete freedom and secrecy, after 
having sworn oaths at the altar of the Lord that they will choose the 
best man in the just judgment of a free conscience, they should have 
the names of all whom they are considering put down by a notary on 
identical ballots, with only one name on each ballot; and after that 
name a series of numbers should be affixed — 1, 2, 3, as many as there 
are persons that have been recognized in the discussion as worthy 
candidates. 
536. Suppose ten have been found in Germany who appear worthy 


[PDF page 356]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
and from among them the one most worthy is to be chosen in com- 
mon: Let the name of only one [candidate] be placed on each ballot, 
the numbers one to ten placed under or beside the name, and the ten 
ballots, each containing one of the ten names, given to each elector. 
When the ballots have been received by the electors, each one should 
go aside alone and secretly — or with his secretary if he cannot read 
and write — and with all ten ballots placed before him he should read 
the name of each. 
537. Then in the name of God he should ponder, following his own 
conscience, which number among them all is least qualified and place 
a simple long mark in ink above the number 1. After this he should 
decide who is least suitable after him and mark the number 2 with a 
simple long mark [on his ballot]; and so on until he arrives at the best, 
in his judgment, and there he will mark number 10, or the number 
which corresponds to the total number of persons. 
538. And it is a good idea for everyone to use the same ink, identical 
pens, and the same simple marks — long or short, whichever is agreed 
upon — so that the mark of one cannot be distinguished from the 
others to guarantee freedom for the electors and peace among all. 
539. When the marks have been made, each of the electors should 
carry his ballots in his hand and throw them with his own hand into an 
empty sack hanging in the midst of the electors. When the ballots 
have been deposited in the sack, the priest who has celebrated the 
mass, should be called as well as an accountant with a list of the 
names in order of the ten, let us say, from whom the choice is to be 
made. Sitting among the electors, the priest should take the ballots 
out of the sack in the order in which they come to hand and read the 
name and the number marked. The accountant should write the 
number at the side of the name and do the same for all. When this is 
completed, the accountant should add up the numbers for each name, 
and the one who has the highest number will be emperor. 
540. By following this procedure countless frauds are avoided. 
Nothing sinister can happen. It would not be possible to devise a more 
righteous, just, honest, and free method of election and through it, if 
the electors vote according to their consciences, it is impossible for 
the one who is judged best by a collective verdict not to be put in 
power. It is not possible to discover a method which is more secure. 
Nay, by this method an infallible decision can be obtained, since every 
sort of comparison of all persons and of all the estimates and argu- 
304 


[PDF page 357]
Book III, para. 542 
ments likely to be made by each elector are included in this process — 
which I was only able to devise with great effort.’ You may well 
believe that no more perfect method can be found. 
541. Still the following precaution should be taken so that no elec- 
tor can be perverted by self-interest: If one or more laymen has been 
listed for general consideration among those to be chosen, the form 
with his own name should not be given to him, although all the others 
with that exception, should be given to him. This would avoid an 
occasion for suspicion that he might adjudge himself the best of all, 
and place the highest number in front of his own name. With this 
single exception the prescribed procedure should be followed com- 
pletely and this will result in an election better than any other that can 
be found. 
'The proposed electoral system (originally in Book 11, ch. 33, no. 245a) is taken from 
Ramon Llull, De arte electionis, which is in the library at Kues (no. 83). 
CORA TPE RE exe xa LT 
DELS TSA VERYOUSHEUL PROC Eh DURE HOR EE 
DISGUSSIONTOE DIPPIGULT MADT ERS IN GOUN Cis 
IN ORDER TO OBTAIN THE FREE OPINION OF 
EVERYONE WITHOUT INTIMIDATION. WE ALSO 
DISCUSS ANOTHER INGENIOUS VOTING DEVICE 
USED BYe DHE Vv BNET TAINS: 
542. Using this same electoral procedure many questions can be 
decided in the meetings of the princes which can be of great benefit to 
the commonwealth. For often a question is proposed in which the 
advantage of some of the princes is on one side and the good of the 
commonwealth on the other. Then individuals do not dare to give 
advice openly on behalf of the common good because they are afraid 
that the others are of a different opinion and they cannot win, and 
thus if they lose, they would gain the enmity of the prince whose 
interest would be adversely affected by the advice. Often even the 
chairman, the emperor or his representative, seems to be too partial to 
one side of a question. Then his advisors are prevented from freely 
giving advice out of fear of displeasing him. 
395 


[PDF page 358]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
543. Therefore since all deliberation ought to be aimed at the praise 
of God and the public good, and what is of greater benefit to the 
public and common good should always be more readily chosen, 
according to this plan when there is any doubtful point on which a 
decision is to be made let two of the more learned participants stand 
up in the center and take each side, defending the affirmative and 
negative positions and analyzing the consequences for each side. 
544. For example if the question is whether a customs-system 
should exist, the affirmative would say, yes, because no one is especi- 
ally burdened by it but what is paid by the merchants is contributed 
both by the seller and the buyers and the merchant himself, and that 
is the most convenient way to raise money for the public good, and 
unless this easy way is used to raise the money necessary for the 
protection of the commonwealth, there would be no peace. Therefore 
for these and other reasons, the affirmative should be chosen. 
545. The one who is defending the other side says: This way to 
collect money is unfair and illicit, taking money for the com- 
monwealth from those who are not its subjects and have committed 
no crime, and it is of no utility, for the peace is not preserved by it. 
Therefore the negative should be chosen. 
546. When the subject has been discussed, let the question be 
written down and an affirmative vote put down below and a negative 
vote under that. Under that let an intermediate position be written if it 
is expressed — for example, if one of the two says the following: 
Besides those who say that the affirmative is to be held that customs 
duties should remain in force, and others who say they should not, 
others say that they should exist but be modified as follows, no 
customs duties should be placed on food and drink unless they are 
transported for business purposes, and some say [the duty should be] 
not more than one florin for a cart load of wine or one hundred 
bushels of wheat, and others that customs should be collected as 
before but the money should be put into the public treasury for public 
expenditures, others that the money should be divided — half going to 
the princes and administrative officials and judges and the rest to the 
public treasury. These opinions and those that probably can be devel- 
oped should be expressed publicly by these two and if anyone wants to 
add others, it should be possible to do so. All of these should be 
written in order under the appropriate heading and ballots should be 
306 


[PDF page 359]
Book IIT, para. 550 
prepared according to the number of counsellors voting and a ballot 
given to each one. 
547. When he has it, each one in his residence, after taking an oath, 
should choose one and cross out the others with pen and ink by 
drawing a large line through them. In the morning they should come 
together in council and each one put his ballot into a sack. When they 
have been deposited, a secretary should take them out, one after the 
other, and an accountant should sit there, and after the counting has 
taken place, the opinion which has the most votes in that election will 
be the best of all. All the ballots should be the same size and written in 
the same handwriting, as indicated above. 
548. The same procedure should be followed in case of a dispute 
among several magnates on the same matter. All their names should 
be put on identical ballots. After the case has been explained and is 
understood, then the counsellors should cross out with their pens the 
names of all except the one in whose favor the matter ought in their 
opinion to be decided. In this manner the consultation will remain 
free and secret and will be the result of careful consideration, which is 
particularly important. 
549. This year I have drawn up a small tract on the way to improve 
the discussion of controversial subjects.' Therefore I will not speak 
further on this. 
550. Itis true that where a simple affirmative or negative decision is 
to be made on a question, the method of voting employed in the realm 
of the Venetians would be useful. They have round balls of wool cloth 
and two vessels or wooden containers shaped like chalices. The wood 
should be hollowed out at the bottom of the chalice and the balls 
should fall into that part through a passage from the upper part. One 
container is black and stands for “no” and the other white and stands 
for “yes.” After the counselor takes one ball between his thumb and 
forefinger and shows it in the air to the others to avoid fraud, then he 
lets it fall into the palm of his hand and closes his hand. Then he puts 
his hand into the white container and if he favors the affirmative 
opinion he lets the ball drop through the vessel into the bottom and 
takes his hand out with his fist closed. He also puts his hand into the 
other container so that no one can know into which one he has 
' This tract has been lost. 
307 


[PDF page 360]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
dropped the ball. But if he does not favor the affirmative side, he takes 
his hand out without opening it and puts it into the other one and 
drops it there. In this way the vote remains secret. After this the balls 
are extracted by opening the lower part below the passageway, and 
they are counted and the conclusion is affirmative or negative 
depending on the number of balls in one container in comparison 
with those in the other. 
551. By agreeing on these procedures one could always decide on 
the basis of the merits of the case or the situation because freedom of 
decision and secrecy are preserved. 
CHAP T BROS 
iP PEACE [silO BE PRESSE RV EDEAN DE DES Ol ATT ON 
AND GENERAL DISCORD AVOIDED THE POWER OF 
RHE EMPIRE MUST BE REOES DABLISHED= DHIS (GAN 
BE DONE BY PUBLIC TAXES DAL WAGES AND Al 
PUBLTIG@ TREASURY DHE BS TABLISTIMENTE OO} A 
PUBLIG ARMY WOULD BE USERPUL TO >THE 
PROVINCES AND DOMINIONS [OF THE EMPIRE] AND 
WOULDIRELIEVE THEM TOR EXPENSE. 
552. <A special effort must be made to re-establish the power of the 
empire. Otherwise all the laws that are adopted will be without effect. 
The strength of a law lies in its coercive force, and power maintains 
and carries with it coercion. If it is taken away — since men are 
attracted to what is forbidden and from adolescence are prone to evil! 
— legal sanctions are weakened and therefore peace and justice do not 
long endure. Since this is the case, a way to carry out reform must be 
provided. 
553. At one time bishops, abbots, princes, and counts were 
accustomed to provide personal and financial services to the empire, 
both on a daily and annual basis, in proportion to the province and 
territory under them. On this basis paid soldiers were kept as the 
standing army of the empire for the defense of the commonwealth, 
' Genesis 8:21. 
308 


[PDF page 361]
Book III, para. 558 
and the emperor was accustomed to maintain his imperial status most 
honorably. When the imperial army for the defense of the com- 
monwealth ceased to exist, the commonwealth lost a great deal. 
554. Every prince and every corporate group is obliged to take 
action to resist robbers in their areas. This is a very great expense and 
the subjects spend their time on this and cannot carry on their work 
freely. Deep divisions are created in all parts of the empire and hardly 
anyone trusts anyone else. But if there were one public army to keep 
the peace and defend justice for all, the commonwealth would not 
have so many useless and wasteful expenses. 
555. And so it would be very useful to give serious attention to an 
arrangement whereby this kind of army would be established to keep 
the peace and maintain justice through moderate annual contribu- 
tions proportionate to [the size of] the domain and territory. And so 
an agreed portion of the imperial customs and salt taxes that have 
been granted to the princes for the commonwealth could easily be 
reserved each year for the expenses of the empire and a moderate 
amount could be deducted from all customs duties. And thus those 
taxes and provincial contributions would be placed in the public 
treasury at Frankfurt for the army mentioned above and for the 
expenses of the empire. The proper disposition of the amount so 
collected would be decided at the annual council in the presence of 
the electors and others, so that everything would be determined in a 
just and prudent manner. 
556. ‘Then the great expenses would cease which today the princes 
are needlessly required to incur, and the provinces would be enriched 
and the commonwealth and empire strengthened anew. Then the 
bishops could carry out their spiritual duties and assign their temporal 
duties to administrators and a national army would eliminate all 
tyranny for the empire. 
557. O God, if the determined spirit of all those who raise these 
proposals would only attempt to put them into practice, then the 
empire would flourish again in our day. But if we are indifferent to 
them and overcome by our blind cupidity and if we continue for a long 
time in the old perverse way, there is no doubt that the holy empire 
and the good estate of the commonwealth and of all of us will shortly 
be terminated. 
558. Neither a churchman nor a layman can be exempt from the 
law. For the government of all temporal things must first be directed 
309 


[PDF page 362]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
toward the public good. Hence our most excellent Saxon, Hugh, who 
is called “of St. Victor,” in his book, De Sacramentis, when he speaks 
of the property of the church, writes, ““Those properties can never be 
removed from the power of the king. For if reason and necessity 
demand it, the [royal] power owes them protection and these proper- 
ties owe the king a contribution in a case of necessity. For just as the 
royal power cannot refuse to give the protection that it owes to 
another, so the churchmen who obtain properties on condition of a 
contribution to the king in return for his protection cannot legally 
refuse it.””” 
559. What blessed Ambrose has said in his letter, De Tradendis 
Basilicis’ and what many others have said on this could be cited, but 
since it all agrees with the above, I omit it for the sake of brevity. 
2PL 176, p. 420. 
3PL 16, p. 036 (Ad Marcellinum). 
GQEAP TEREX 
LAWSUITS SHOULD BE REDUCED AND APPEALS OF 
UNIMPORTANT CASES BEYOND THE PROVINCIAL 
LEVEL TO THE ROMAN CURIA SHOULD BE 
PROHIBITED. THOSE THAT ARE OF INTERES D © 
THE COMMONWEALTH SHOULD BE DECIDED IN THE 
IMPERIAL COUNCIL, EVEN WHEN THEY INVOLVE 
RELIGIOUS MATTERS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE 
CANONS OF THE HOLY FATHERS WHICH SHOULD BE 
RE= INA Gabe Dy 
560. No doubt there are many other abuses besides those discussed 
above, that harm the commonwealth but it would be [too] long to 
enumerate them. We know that the duration of judicial controversies 
in both the secular and ecclesiastical judicial systems causes great 
injury to the commonwealth because of the great confusion which it 
creates and the interminable length of the litigation, especially 
because cases do not end in the localities where they arise or in their 
own provinces. The most trivial case involving benefices is thus 
repeatedly appealed to the Roman curia where only the most import- 
310 


[PDF page 363]
Book III, para. 562 
ant cases should be discussed. Thus because they wish a grant of 
“expectancies”! or the bestowal of usurped benefices or on account of 
litigation, all that is earned by parents is brought by their children to 
the [papal] curia and nothing is brought back except what they had 
already possessed in the province; for instance, a little benefice — 
perhaps already granted to their own parents. And because occasional 
promotions to a fortune are made in the curia, everyone goes to Rome 
and stays there from their tender years expecting to be made rich, and 
they postpone their studies and religious exercises. They bring gold 
and silver and come back with charters. And because the canons of 
the holy fathers were opposed to this and experience has taught us 
how much harm is done to the commonwealth on this account, it must 
certainly be reformed. 
561. Let no one be persuaded by the common saying that the 
secular power may not interfere with an ecclesiastical order made by 
the authority of the Roman pontiffs, whether the granting of benefices 
or of favors or judicial decisions in litigation. While the secular power 
cannot change any ecclesiastical legislation adopted to aid divine 
worship or in the interest of the freedom of those who serve God, it 
must at least provide for the [needs of the] commonwealth, while 
respecting the above. 
562. No one should say that the most sacred emperors who adopted 
many holy laws for the good of the commonwealth concerning the 
election of bishops, the granting of benefices, and the observance of 
religion, were in error and did not have the power to legislate in the 
way that we read they did in D. 63 [c. 34] Nos sanctorum which is a text 
of Kings Charles and Louis. Indeed we read that the Roman pontiffs 
asked them to make laws for the public good on divine worship and 
against sinners among the clergy. And if perhaps it is said that the 
binding force of all those laws came from the approval of the Apos- 
tolic See and synod, I do not want to insist on this. Although I have 
read and collected 86 chapters of the ecclesiastical regulations of the 
ancient emperors which it would be superfluous to insert here, as well 
as many others belong to Charlemagne and his successors among 
which may also be found provisions prescribing what the Roman 
pontiff and all the other patriarchs should do in consecrating bishops 
and other matters, I have never found either that the pope was asked 
'Expectancies were legally binding promises of succession to church offices. They were 
forbidden by Pope Boniface VIII, but the practice continued. 
By iik 


[PDF page 364]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
to give his approval or that the legislation was ever said to be binding 
because his approbation was given. Rather, as is said above in a 
certain place, it appears that several Roman pontiffs said that they 
revered and accepted those ordinances. 
563. But accepting the fact that those imperial ordinances on 
church matters do not have any force except insofar as those 
ordinances are first found in the canons or are approved and accepted 
by the synods — as is proved to be the case from the common widely- 
known saying that laws do not disdain to imitate the sacred canons 
and the fact that in any opposition or conflict in ecclesiastical matters 
between a law and a canon the canon undoubtedly takes precedence — 
nevertheless if the reform that we ask to be carried out were based on 
the ancient legal holy statutes of the church, there would be no doubt 
about its power and authority. For no one doubts that those laws 
agree very well with the canonical statutes, and in no way contradict 
them. 
564. To sum up with one word — if the most devout emperor and 
the whole council subject to him, considering the needs of the com- 
monwealth and reflecting on the reasons and occasions for the decline 
in divine worship and the shameful state of morals at all levels, would 
return to the ancient sacred canons and the most holy practices of the 
ancients and together with his whole council would decree that 
whatever went against them — whether privileges, or exemptions, or 
new practices in the granting of benefices or in disputes — was to be 
abolished and most strict obedience was to be given to the holy 
canons, I would like to know what Christian could say that he [the 
emperor] had attempted to do anything beyond his power and auth- 
ority when these things were done in the interest of the observance of 
the ancient canons and of the sacred legal sanctions, for the increase 
of divine worship and the good of the commonwealth? 
565. Let no one persuade you, most wise emperor, to abandon this 
holy intention of yours. For many, while appearing to obey, invent 
specious reasons to defend their evil lives and to find excuses for their 
sins. Christ alone who is the way, the truth, and the life,” should be 
sought by following the ways of our fathers. Evil practices introduced 
out of cupidity, ambition, and avarice should be eliminated so that 
“John 14:6. 
Bae 


[PDF page 365]
Book IIT, para. 568 
thus the canons without which the peace of the church cannot be 
preserved nor religion increased may take on new life. 
566. ‘There are many other things that kings should do. In particular 
they should repress adultery, theft, parricide, perjury, pillage, and 
similar sins and drive them out of the country, as St. Cyprian says* - 
which is also contained in [C.] 23 q. 5 [c. 40] Rev debet along with 
similar statements. In addition, they should eradicate the deception 
involved in usurious and criminal contracts, in games of dice, in 
monopolies and similar practices and they should see that holy feast 
days are observed, and prevent the excessive expenditures which are 
customary for weddings and funerals and for fine clothes and the like. 
In brief they should direct all things to the public good. 
3Pseudo-Cyprian, De duodecim abusivis saeculi, ch. 9, quoted in the Decretum. 
GEA Re wie 
NOTHING IS AS HARMFUL FOR THE CHURCH AS 
DISCORD BETWEEN THE CHURCH AND THE EMPIRE. 
THERE IS A DISCUSSION AS TO HOW HARMONY 
BETWEEN TEEIMe GAN BES PRESERVED BY Waty OF 
EPMO Gi Ass Rin GO NSTD BRAT TON OF BO mE 
POWERS IS SET FORTHT-IN A FIGURATIVE WAY AND 
WE AGE LUA Se DE ENG ECP RIE S'S EDFA aE NIG Hails 
SUMMARIZED IN A BRIEF AND PREGNANT 
COMPARISON. 
567. I have shown above that the true concordant harmony of the 
Catholic Church consists in rightly ordered rule based on common 
consent and election and the free submission of all or of a majority, 
and that the canons and both divine laws and those adopted in a 
human rational way by the common consent of all show this method 
as the most equitable way from this transitory life to heaven. 
568. But we know that the efforts of the envious and ever-deceitful 
devil often create divisions between the church and the empire, 
because of arguments about superiority in power or fear of the loss of 
313 


[PDF page 366]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
temporal possessions or something similar. As appears sufficiently 
clear to all from the Gospel saying that a kingdom divided is 
threatened with collapse,' when that conflict rages, neither right nor 
law nor the enforcement of the ecclesiastical order can continue. 
Therefore the first and most important effort of all orthodox men will 
be to preserve from harm the hierarchy of the two powers in con- 
tinued harmonious collaboration. 
569. And so when the disturber of the peace insinuates these things 
in our minds to cause discord, the Roman pontiff, first of all, should 
consider that a minister of Christ is exalted in humiliation, and the 
one who is supreme is supposed to minister to the others, not domi- 
nate them by his rule, and that both powers come from God and in 
our time of grace are truly distinct, as Nicholas, the greatest of the 
Roman pontiffs, asserts in D. 96 [c. 6] Cum ad verum. This is con- 
firmed in D. 97 [c. 1] Ecclesiae meae. 
570. Let him consider whether the Roman pontiff receives the same 
high praise and command that his subjects obey as is the case for the 
empire in [St. Paul’s Epistle to the] Romans 13.’ I speak of the 
Roman pontiff, not of the holy priesthood. Also the text [c. 22] 
Celebritatem of D. 4 [D. 3] of De consecratione and the first section of 
the [Novellae 63) Authentica, Quomodo oportet episcopis at the beginning 
and many similar passages seem at least to prove that the two powers 
are independent and distinct and that both came from above. And 
that was the true opinion of all the ancients, although doubts have 
arisen because of the sinister desire of many writers to please. Let us 
return to the old views. 
571. Even if the pope had the power of both swords, the argument 
of those writers who say that the emperor has the use of his sword in 
dependence upon him would not in fact be proved. For no one denies 
that there have been many different infidel kings in the world whose 
royal power came from God without their recognizing a superior. On 
whom, | ask, did the empire depend when Paul appealed to Caesar, or 
when Christ gave his approval to it [the empire] when he commanded 
that the things be rendered to Caesar that were Caesar’s.* Also even if 
he has the power of the sword, the pope cannot argue that he is first in 
this, as if the entire power of the sword depended on him, if he calls to 
' Matthew 12:25; Luke Tule. 
? Romans N\A 
3 Acts 25:9-10; Matthew 22:2. 
314 


[PDF page 367]
Book III, para. 574 
mind the things that have been rightly said above and an infinite 
number of other things which have been left to us by our forebears. 
572. The pope should not be exalted by the spontaneous humble 
reverence of the emperor for the sake of Christ when he addresses 
and honors him as father, see the last law [1. 8] of the Code [1 1] De 
summa trinitate et fide catholica, or because for a long time he has 
allowed the pope to address him in the second person singular 
[familiar form] according to the chapter [c. 6] Quam gravi, of [Decretals 
V 20] De crimine falsi. Rather let him recall that the humble Catholic 
emperors venerated the Roman pontiff in their writings and works as 
their spiritual father and the guardian of souls. Also many more 
quotations can be found that show that the Roman pontiff was 
accustomed to give much greater honor to the emperor — for instance, 
the letter of Pope Agatho and his council to Constantine [III] where 
he says, “All the lowly rulers of the church, servants of your Christian 
empire ...”* And on this let the chapter Victor of D. 97 [c. 2] now 
suffice. 
573. In the chapters [c. 4] Omnes principes and [c. 3] Legebatur of 
[Decretals 1 33] De maioritate et obedientia the emperor does not deny 
that he should obey the bishops as his fathers. This applies to the 
pope as to the others. Indeed let him remember the chapter [c. 2] 
Omnis anima of [Decretals 1 39] De censibus which is a text of St. Paul, 
and also how many honors he has received from the empire. Is it not 
true that when the patriarch of Constantinople with the support of his 
synod called himself for many years the universal first patriarch and 
bishop, and after the death of Emperor Mauritius and his sons, Pope 
Boniface [III] asked Phocas who had succeeded as emperor to restore 
him to supremacy, we read that the Apostolic See was re-established 
as first by imperial decree, according to the true writings of Paulus 
Warnefridus, the historian of the Lombards, who was alive at the 
time?? 
574. Let him remember the magnificent gifts and the protection 
that the church received from the Roman empire when trouble 
threatened it. Likewise how more than two hundred years after Con- 
stantine I, the acts of the Sixth Council say that Pope Agatho, over- 
come with physical exhaustion because the earlier support for the 
*Mansi 11, p. 286. 
°Paulus Warnefridus, Historia gentis Longobardorum, tv, 36. Warnefridus lived over a 
century after the events he recounts. 
Ww wm 


[PDF page 368]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
church was little by little disappearing as a result of various calamities, 
was relieved of these calamities by the emperor.° And let the [sym- 
bolic] pre-eminence of the sun over the moon or the soul over the 
body suffice for him without affirming that the empire does not exist 
except through him and in dependence upon him. 
575. Ifthe deposition of kings and emperors and the transfer of the 
empire and perhaps other events should move the pope to presume 
that this is his apostolic right, let him know that, if it were not perhaps 
against religious humility, a clear answer could be given in all of these 
cases — that perhaps these cases only argue for that power in the pope 
as pope because of the consent or acceptance of the contending 
parties. There were those in the past, including cardinals of the 
Apostolic See at the time and a certain general council held at Rome, 
who defended Henry IV when he was crowned at Basel by the 
representatives of the Romans contrary to the excommunication by 
Gregory [VII] or Hildebrand.’ Indeed a general synod held at Basel at 
that time elected Honorius as pope, for which act Henry was finally 
excommunicated.* 
576. Strong arguments are also found in defense of Frederick II,’ a 
man who was certainly most active in the church for the defense of the 
faith — as well as in favor of other emperors. The people often yielded 
to the pope for the sake of obedience. These things should not be 
cited as examples of papal power unless, as indicated above, they were 
done because of a crime or sin, as is stated in the chapter [c. 34] 
Venerabilem of |Decretals 1 6| De electione and the chapter [c. 13] Novit 
of [Decretals 1 1| De judictis. 
577. Let all these questions cease to be discussed further. Let us 
agree with our holy predecessors in the past, that the temporal pos- 
sessions given to the church should never be preferred to peace. 
Rather let us follow the example of Pope Leo [VIII] in his council 
who, as indicated above, gave everything back in perpetuity to Otto I 
and his successors because [he thought that] in view of the weakness 
®Mansi rr, p. 190. 
7On Cusanus’ use of Beno, Gesta Romanae ecclesiae, here, see Werner Kramer, ‘“‘Verzeich- 
nis der Briisseler Handschriften,” MF'CG, 14 (1980), pp. 182-197. Gregory VII (1021- 
1085), a reforming pope (1073-1085), opposed Emperor Henry IV in the Investiture 
controversy. 
5 Cf. Book im, ch. 3, no. 314. 
° Frederick II (1194-1250), a Holy Roman emperor who was in continual conflict with the 
church, especially with Pope Innocent III. 
316 


[PDF page 369]
Book IIT, para. 5&0 
of the faith at that time and the disturbance which had arisen, it was 
useful for the emperor to be the strong defender of the faith.'® 
578. When will it be seen how important it is, especially today, for 
the empire to be strong? For without a defender, we see where we are 
tending. Let it suffice for the pope [to know] that the empire supports 
the church in all things. It [the empire] does whatever is possible for 
the protection of the church, no matter how its forces suffer. It does 
not seize by force; it does not seek to take back what it has given; but it 
defends and supports the priesthood which alone it venerates as most 
worthy. 
579. On the other hand, the emperor should not raise himself up 
for any reason against the holy priesthood of God, on the basis of 
[Novellae 7| Authentica, De non alienandis rebus ecclesiasticis para. 
Sinimus, collection 2, which says that the empire does not differ from 
priesthood. Neither on the basis of this nor other texts should he 
make himself the equal of that high ecclesiastical power. For the 
empire is illuminated by the priesthood as the moon by the sun. 
Although the moon was created by God as was the sun, its light comes 
from the sun. If every imperial order should direct man to his end 
through a righteous life, and God is the end and Christ the way, the 
empire should seek light for its footsteps from the priesthood. Those 
earthly things which have been given incidentally by the empire to the 
priesthood and which benefit it by providing the means for its sub- 
sistence are not in any way to be compared to those that are eternal. 
The emperor who is not the owner [dominus] but the administrator of 
everything in the empire should not think that he has done anything 
very great with goods not his own, when for the public good and by 
divine commission he has directed that they be used for the increase 
of the honor of God. For “the ends of the earth and the earth itself 
and the plenitude thereof are the Lord’s.”"’ 
580. The holy priesthood which is related to the empire as the true 
life-giving soul to the body is especially to be honored. For God is a 
spirit who is joined by grace to the body, that is the faithful people by 
means of the sacraments, administered by the priests of the Lord, as 
their souls, so that man is in God. And so with spirits at peace, all 
dispute and commotion should be transformed into a harmony and 
confirmed forever, because as noted above, the whole church is made 
up of body and soul together and the Holy Spirit inhabits and inspires 
0 See Book 11, no. 483. "Psalm 23:11. 
317 


[PDF page 370]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
the church with concord so that by the action of the Holy Spirit one 
church made up of all those who believe in Christ can live in concord, 
with the priests as the soul and the faithful as the body. 
581. Butas we know, once the harmony and concordant proportion 
of nature is broken in any living thing, the soul is separated from the 
body after a period of mortal fever and incurable illness. 
582. The Roman pontiff should not elevate himself above all the 
priests of the Lord, and think that others can take no action unless he 
has permitted it. Rather he should remember that the papacy has 
been vacant for long periods, for instance, for seven years after [Pope] 
Marcellinus and at other times occasionally for two years,'? and still 
the priesthood did not cease to act. But he should consider that his 
superiority which was intended by God to be used for the proper 
ordering of all and to keep the peace and tranquility of the church 
undisturbed, gives him nothing in the way of spiritual power which 
alone can come from Christ — and for this he should rightly rejoice. 
583. He should also consider that if the priesthood is like a single 
soul which is complete in the whole and in every part, then greater or 
lesser executive power in a given province, since it depends on some- 
thing external to itself, does not decrease the spiritual power in itself. 
Hence just as the soul as it exists in a man’s foot is not greater or less 
as to the life which it gives the foot, and is the same soul that resides 
in the head or the heart, so the papacy itself is like the soul in the head 
and the patriarchs the soul in the ears or eyes and the rank of 
archbishop the soul in the arms and the bishops in the fingers and so 
on for each rank down to the feet which in the commonwealth are 
called the peasants where the curate properly represents the soul that 
gives them life.! 
584. ‘Therefore there is a single power from God of binding and 
loosing and of giving life to all, although among the members there 
seem to be some who are greater and others of lesser importance. 
585. Therefore the Roman pontiff should be aware that the vital 
harmony of the church is preserved by the divine and canonical 
sanctions, which are all rooted in one source, the Holy Spirit and the 
natural law. The more immediately accessible seat of the soul is in the 
See Liber pontificalis, 1, 6 (ed. L. Duchesne) on Pope Marcellinus. The papacy was also 
vacant from 1241 to 1243. 
'3 On the use of comparisons of social organization to the human body, see Ewart Lewis, 
Medieval Political Ideas, New York, 1954, 1, pp. 193-224. See also Vincent of Beauvais, 
Speculum doctrinale, vi, 8 (PL 212, p. 740). 
318 


[PDF page 371]
Book III, para. 588 
purest blood contained at the center of the heart. With the blood the 
vital spirits provide a flow of nourishment through all the arteries of 
the whole body. As therefore those arteries go everywhere in the 
whole body branching out from one source so that the life-giving 
spirit flows through them, so the divine laws circulate with equal 
power throughout the whole body of the church, holding all its mem- 
bers in a sweet vital constraint. 
586. ‘Therefore there is no member — whether head or foot or in- 
between — through which they do not flow and which is not included 
in the circulation. In the same way, the veins that start from the liver 
and spread through the whole body and connect with arteries, merg- 
ing with the flesh as it were as an intermediary between the flesh and 
the fine blood of the arteries, are like the canon laws in the body of the 
ecclesiastical commonwealth that are adopted in a council, which can 
be compared to the liver where all the veins meet. Like the veins, the 
canons act as an intermediary through which carnal man is led to the 
spiritual life. 
587. Therefore the pope should not be flattered into thinking that 
someone who is a part of the body of the church is over it and exempt 
from the salutary precepts of the canonical sanctions. And as the tiny 
veins that supply the particular members do not have life-giving force 
nor the nourishment of the soul unless they go back to a common 
source, so all the statutes of the provinces and local areas should 
conform to the common canons without any contradiction. And the 
basic principles on this subject can be developed by analogy with what 
has been said at greater length above. 
588. After this let His Imperial Highness consider how to apply 
what has been said about the structure of the body to what has been 
said about the empire. For the body is made up of bones, nerves, and 
flesh. But the nerves that are in an intermediate position and share the 
nature of both are all connected to the brain where the second seat of 
the reason is located and they go out to link all the joints of the body 
in different ways with the one body. And these are like the imperial 
laws which strike a balance between severity and laxity and bring all 
the members together in harmony. And the head which represents 
the emperor is not exempted, since all those nerves flow from the 
operation of reason and nature to which law no one is superior.'* 
'S The library at Kues contains a number of medical works. Cusanus may have developed 
his interest in medicine from his friend, Paolo Toscanelli, in Padua. 
319 


[PDF page 372]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
589. Even the lawgiver himself is not exempted. Thus Ambrose in 
his 75th letter, to the Emperor Valentinian, says, “You have made 
laws to prevent anyone from being free to act in any other way. What 
you have written for others, you have also written for yourself. For the 
emperor makes laws which he is the first of all to be obliged to 
observe.”'? And there is a popular saying, “Submit to the law which 
you have made.” For no one is obliged to observe an unjust law, and 
no living person is exempt from a just one. 
590. And so the highest power itself, the head, must see that those 
nerves are not too loose or too tight since this could harm the whole 
body. A law should be stretched like a bowstring — not too much or 
the bow will break, and not too little or when it is released it cannot 
shoot the arrow. 
591. He should also note that as nerves adhere strongly to the bones 
even when the flesh has decayed, so the legislation and laws of the 
country ought to be kept uncorrupted and in perpetual force. The 
country is rightly compared to the bones that have a sweet marrow 
and long duration. The flesh, however, may be compared to transitory 
men who often fail in human ways because of weakness, ignorance, or 
illness. With these the prince should act as a father now sparing, now 
dispensing, now punishing, as is suitable for the well-being of each 
one, always keeping the law in force. For if a law is corrupted in any 
part the whole body is damaged, just as [happens] when a nerve is 
injured in any part of the body. 
592. Also particular laws which we may compare to the small 
individual veins, ought to be revised so that they do not go against the 
common law which provides for the public good nor against the 
original source of all laws, the natural law of reason. Otherwise 
disease would attack that member easily because it is in opposition to 
the rest and would infect the whole body to which it is connected. 
And so the king should be like a zither-player who knows how to 
respect the harmony in the strings, both the greater and lesser ones, 
and not stretch them too much nor too little so that a common 
concord is heard in the harmony of all. 
593. And so like an expert doctor the emperor’s concern should be 
to keep the body well so that the life-giving spirit can dwell in it 
properly because it is well-proportioned. For when he sees any one of 
! Pll 165 ps 1047. 
320 


[PDF page 373]
Book III, para. 596 
the four temperaments in excess or deficient from the mean and the 
body therefore unbalanced, whether because the melancholy which is 
abundant avarice has produced various diseases in the body — usury, 
fraud, deceit, theft, pillage and all those ways in which great wealth is 
acquired without labor through some deceptive artifice — which can- 
not take place without harming the commonwealth — or if he sees the 
body grow feverish because of choleric wars, dissension and division, 
or swell up with sanguine pomposity, luxury, banqueting and the like, 
or become morose because of a temperament which is phlegmatic 
concerning virtuous efforts both to gain a livelihood and to protect the 
fatherland, he should seek a remedy and listen to the books and 
advice of the most learned doctors of the commonwealth in earlier 
times. 
594. Let him compound a recipe. Let him test it by taste, sight, and 
smell to determine whether it is suitable for the time and place. If he 
sees that it is, he should recommend it first to his Privy Council, the 
teeth, to analyze it and find out whether there is any comfort and 
healing power in that recipe. When it has been well chewed there, if 
he finds that there is something useful in it, he should send it for 
fuller examination to the Great Council, the stomach, to be digested, 
purified, and the pure elements separated from the impure. After this 
he should send the purified proposal to the consistory of judges, the 
liver, so that that healing medicinal law may be distributed as required 
to each member. Let him show paternal care in all things to all the 
parts and members, sometimes using a sweet ointment, sometimes a 
cleansing lotion, or a cauterizer, and any other preservative medi- 
cines. And let him never move to cut off a member except with 
sadness and compassion and only when nothing else avails and there 
is a danger of infection. 
595. This sums up all the above. You, O unconquerable emperor, 
will apprehend it very quickly since it truly contains an accurate 
description of Your Highness. 
596. And so act, O great Caesar, that although nothing in the way of 
knowledge can be derived from this inept and uninstructive effort, 
this collection may at least be read quickly as a stimulus to the most 
studious and ablest minds gathered around you. It is to be hoped that 
an occasion to do so may be given to the wise and inquiry will be 
aroused in those most subtle intellects that have been dormant until 
now and thus when the material is presented, sparked by this little 
321 


[PDF page 374]
Nicholas of Cusa: The Catholic Concordance 
coal, from the depths of many minds filled with prudence, wisdom, 
and all circumspection, a great flame igniting and burning con- 
tinuously may blaze which will destroy all abuses and bring back the 
justice of law to the earthly empire and make the splendor of the 
empire shine forth and increase continually. 
597. We wait for you eagerly, father of all, to initiate and carry forth 
this most happy deed in our time. Act with most eager zeal to do this 
for your immortal glory, o most kind prince, so that thus the way to 
peace in the church and eternal fame for you and your subjects may 
be re-established in our time in praise of Christ who reigns blessed 
for ever. Amen. 
598. ‘This is the end of the collection, The Catholic Concordance, 
made from various approved writings of the ancients in praise of 
Almighty God, which I, Nicholas of Cusa, dean of the church of St. 
Florin in Koblenz, and lowly doctor of the decrees, offer in all 
humility to this holy Council of Basel, judging and asserting nothing 
in all of it to be true or to be defended as true except what this sacred 
synod will hold to be Catholic and true — and ready to be corrected in 
all respects by all orthodox teaching. 
322 


[PDF page 375]
Index 
Acatius, 46, 90, 109 
Aegidius Romanus, 250 
Africa (Carthage), Councils of, 56, 
65, 72, 75, 79 94, 96, 103, 131, TZ 4AeUZO US Os 5i5s0 15 7iteTO2. 
241 
Agatho, Pope, 47, 55, 66ff., 72, 172, 
QMO nes Aas 
Aistulfus, 217ff 
Albertus Magnus, 7, 29, 41 
Alexander of Hales, 195 
Ambrose, St., 5, 8, 10, 11-13, 18, 
19, 34, 42, 55, 60-62, 111, 113, 
120ff, 201, 203, 204, 206-8, 
27s 201,310,320 
Anacletus (Cletus), Pope, 26, 35, 38, 
42, 93, 109, 112, 196, 201, 221 
Anastasius I, Pope, 25, 35, 45, 46, 
234 
Anicetus, Pope, 124, 182 
Antioch, 39, 46, 112, 117, 202ff 
Antonius de Butrio, 83 
Apostolic See (Rome), 44, 47, 70-2, 
102, 104 
Aquileia, Council of, 55, 65, 251 
archbishop, 26, 174, 184 
Archdeacon, the (Guido de Baysio), 
75) 79, 83, 84, 109, 117, 120, 126ff, 130ff, 143, 146, 164, 
186ff 
Aristotle, 205-12 
Arles, 66, 72, 73, 153, 157, 290ff 
Augustine, St., 7, 11, 12, 15, 16, 18, 
19, 23, 25, 29, 31, 33-7; 42, 
60-2, 72, 73, 90, 103, I14, I19, 
120, 194ff, 198, 201, 213, 217, 
22 Om 22 Ee 2a 
Ausonius, 210 
Bahanes, 48, 261, 268ff 
Basel, xv, xvi, xxv, xxvi, xxii, 117, 
123, 130ff., 160, 204, 224, 262, 
282, 295 
Basil, Emperor, 52, 54, 58, 64, 71, 
214, 238ff, 250ff, 266ff, 272ff, 
282, 295, 302, 316 
Bede, Venerable, 195 
Bernard (of Clairvaux), St. 213 
Bellarmine, St. Robert, xxxiii 
bishops, 24ff, 41 ff, 49, 62ff, 78ff, 
giff, 151ff, r69ff, 176-89, 241, 
255ff, 274, 308ff 
Bohemians, 162ff, 277, 281ff 
Boniface, I. Pope, 97, 139, 169, 219 
Boniface VIII, Pope, xxiv, xxviii, 144 
Burchard of Worms, 85 
cardinals, 47, 92, 101, 124ff, 144, 
148, 156, 249, 316 
cathedra, 24, 28, 30, 35, 38ff 
Celestine, Pope, 137, 139, 155 
Cesarini, Giuliano, Cardinal, xiii, xv, 
4 
Chalcedon, Council of, xxiii, 43-45, 
52, 57, 58, 65, 66, 72, 76, 105, 
111, 113ff, 116, 130ff, 166, 
239, 256, 259, 262, 265, 271ff 


[PDF page 376]
Index 
Charlemagne, 81, 223ff, 240ff, 284, 
311 
Chyrsostom, St. John, 201 
Cicero, 205, 250 
Clement, Pope, 116, 162, 172, 183ff, 
221ff 
concordance (concord), 4, 6-9, 15ff, 
IQ, 22, 24, 32, 49, 58, 76, 86, 
146, 188, 193ff, 204, 214, 230, 
233, 243, 320 consent, 58, 79-87, 92-9, 124-7, 
186-8, 201-4, 206, 208, 210ff, 
214, 226, 229, 230-3, 249, 251, 
265, 283ff, 313 
Constance, Council of, xii, xxv, xxvi, 
XXX, XxxVvi, xliii, 117 
Constantine I, Emperor, 217ff, 239, 
296, 299 Constantine IV, Emperor, 47, 67, 
252 
Constantine, Donation of, xxxi, xxxiv, 
216ff 
Constantinople II, Council of (Sixth 
Council), 47, 55, 59, 67, 71, 72; 
Ff) WOO, UBS, UGB y, ASA, Me). 
ZOM SIS 
Constantinople IV, Council of 
(Eighth Council), xxiii, xo, 45, 
46, 53-5, 57, 58, 61, 64, 66, 67, 69, 70, 103, 106, 109, 115, 116, 
117, 125ff, 130ff, 141, 144, 
163, 166ff, 171ff, 224, 238ff, 
250, 250ff, 261, 266ff, 2736ff, 
284 
council (synod), 48ff, 76ff, o5ff, 
COLI, MO, Bie 
imperial, 283 ff, 299ff 
patriarchal, 59, 108, rroff, 116, 
126 
provincial, 73ff, 179ff, 87, 97, 102, 
137, 149ff universal (general), 49ff, 54, 57, 
62-6, 71ff, 97, 104, 111-15, 
122, 128-230, 153-6, 176, 
193ff, 200, 250, 256, 258, 284ff 
curia (Roman), 175, 292, 310 
Cyprian, St., 18, 24, 25, 29, 33, 36, 
27-40-25 156,025 LO. tomtis 
163, 173, 182ff, 206, 313 
Damasus, Pope, 38, 43, 61, 81, 89, 
TO2s 104,122,120 s0n 2075 
219, 221 
deacons, 148, 151, 176, 183, 241, 243 
Dionysius (the Areopagite), xxi, 
xxviii, 22ff, 145 
Dioscorus, 76, 77, 105, 264 
divine law, 86, 124, 184, 186, 314 
Durandus, Gulielmus, 228 
election, 92, 98ff, 123 ff, 166, 169, 
179, 181-92, 202ff, 208ff, 
228ff, 239, 288, 292, 313 
electors, 228ff, 283, 293, 299, 301- 
305 
Elvira, Council of, 163 
Ephesus, 46 
Ephesus II, “Robber” Council of, 
53, 56, 59, 256, 264, 271 equity (epieikeia), 129, 141, 146, 
209, 249 
Eugene IV, Pope, xiii, xiv, xix, 224, 
282 
Fabianus, Pope, 1og, 138 
Frankfurt, 299, 301 
Galla Placidia, 85 
Gelasius, Pope, 46, 85, 88, 109, 130, 
ize lip, iol 
Gratian, xxi, xxiii, xxxi, 219, 222, 
PG) 
Gregory I, Pope St., 30, 39, 40, 66, 
96, 115, 129, 133, 164, 200, 
242ff, 247ff 
Gregory Nazianzen, 23, 32 
Gregory VII, Pope (Hildebrand), 
224, 316 
Golden Bull, 286, 295n. 
Hadrian I, Pope, 81, 218, 223ff 
Hadrian II, Pope, 70, 114, 115, 135, 
141 
Henry I, Emperor, 224, 228, 231, 
288 
Henry IV, Emperor, 223ff, 316 
heresy, 37, 5off, 100ff, 115, 132, 
244, 265 
Hincmar of Rheims, 44, 50, 85, 136, 
170, 285n 
Honorius, Pope, 40 
Hormisda, Pope, 83, 127, 138 
324 


[PDF page 377]
Index 
Hostiensis, 32, 82, 91, 92, 99, 184, 
222, 226, 231, 294, 298 
Hugh of St. Victor, 174, 310 
Huguccio, 49 
Hussites, xiii, xiv, xv, xliv 
infallibility, 48, 118 
Innocent I, Pope, 46, 137, 162 
Innocent III, Pope, xxix, 223, 231 
Isidore of Seville, St, 57, 152, 223, 
229, 232, 246, 248, 283 
Ivo of Chartres, St, 132ff, 182 
Jerome, St., 6, 24, 34, 36, 42, 43, 
61, 90, 92, 124, 160, 198, 217, 
220ff, 225 
Joannes Andreae, 91, 92, 110, 228 
Joannes Teutonicus, 231 
Lactantius, 36 
Laodicea, Council of, 156 
Leo I, Pope St., 44, 51, 53, 56, 59, 
61, 66, 69, 76, 77, 81, 114, 
132ff, 136ff, 164, 170, 184 
[ESOS Ietoyors, seh, wh, Als, Bd, 7G 
AGi SOX, TUNA, VIG}, MWA, GIO, Bigye. 
164, 216 
Liberius, Pope, 40, 60, 61, 110 
Llull, Ramon, 5n, 305n 
Linus, Pope, 35, 38 
Liutprand of Cremona, 225, 287 
Lucius, Pope, 42 
majority (major part), 29, 40, 58, 
105, 163, 206, 208, 211 
Marcellus, Pope, 52, 110, 112 
Marcellinus, Pope, 318 
Marcian, Emperor, 42, 51, 72, 130, 
11g Veh, DPS, PEN, PST, Ay, ghoul 
Marsilius of Padua, xvii, xix, xxv, 
xxxvili, 197ff, 203, 212 
Martin I, Pope, 77, 97, 102, 108, 
109, 114, 131ff, 156, 170, 186 
metropolitan, 26, 52, 64, 72, 79, 82, 
rol, 10off, 126, 152, 159, 
167ff, 174 ff 
Milevis, Council of, 155ff 
Miltiades, Pope, 35, 37, 114, 220 
natural law, 86, 91, 98-100, 124, 
202, 205, 224, 220ff, 315, 320 
WwW Loa 
natural rights, 230 
necessity, g1, 141ff, 147ff, 310 
Nicaea, Council of, 40, 43, 56, 57; 
60, 74, 75, 79, 80, 158ff, 166, 
169, 230-237, 318 
Nicholas I, Pope, 69, 70, 85, 88, 
Oya, VHel7s, WAL, ee, WANE, tye, 
169, 184, 224, 228, 314 
Nimrod, 210 
Otto I, Emperor, 221, 223, 226ff, 
231, 286, 291 
Otto II, Emperor, xxxi, 287ff 
Optatus of Milevis, 24, 37, 38, 111, 
198, 221 
Orosius, Paulus, 197 
Padua, University of, xi, xliii 
patriarch, 52, 65, 80, 86, 102, rroff, 
115ff, 131ff, 167ff, 184, 200, 
259, 295-311, 315 
Paul Sts5s los ims 174 Oy 1455 
234, 314 Pelagius II, Pope, 52, 143 
Pepin, 218ff, 227 
Peter, St., xx, xxii, 34, 35, 38-41, 
90, 92, 93, 104, 116, r1off 
Photius, 55, 61, 107, 114; 135ff, 
268ff 
Plato, 205, 250 
Prester John, 236 
Ptolemy, Claudius, 235 
Pulcheria, Empress, 61, 69, 255 
Reichstag, xvii, xxiv, xxx, xxvi 
representation, 25, 32, 34, 41, 55, 
84, g6ff, rorff, 106, 111, 114, 
118, 120, 123ff, 126, 146, 263, 
285 
Rimini, Council of, 60, 61, 104 
Sardica, Council of, 94ff, 103, 159ff 
Sedulius Scotus, 213, 261 
senate (senators), 15ff, 23, 25ff, 23, 
ALS i QV, 17h, eHOyE 
Siena, Council of, xiii, xxvi, xliii, 140 
Sigismund, Emperor, xiv, xxix, 4, 
214, 224, 266, 272, 281 
Siricius, Pope, 38, 185 
OWL TSE DA. WIE Vy, rae, SHAE 


[PDF page 378]
Index 
Stephen II, Pope, 88, 157, 218ff 
Sylvester, Pope, 72, 217ff 
Symmachus, Pope, 78, 88, 93, 134 
Theodosius, Emperor, 42, 56, 61, 
69, 264, 271 
Thomas Aquinas, 249 
Toledo, Council(s) of, 65, 79, 81, 
96, 125, 154, 188, 229, 243ff, 
256 
Trier, xi, xiii, xliii, xliv, 202, 210, 
302 
Turin, Council of, 45, 111, 154ff 
Ulrich von Manderscheid, xii, xliv 
use (usage), 81-86, g4ff, rooff, 284 
Valentinian, Emperor, 42, 228, 251, 
254, 264, 271 
Venice, voting procedure, 307 
Warnefredus, Paulus, 315 
Zabarella, Franciscus, Cardinal, 88, 
89, 226 
Zacharias, Pope, 218, 242 
Zosimus, Pope, 94, 103, 129, 170 
326 


[PDF page 379]
CAMBRIDGE TEXTS IN THE 
HISTORY OF POLITICAL THOUGHT 
Titles published in the series thus far 
ARISTOTLE The Politics (edited by Stephen Everson) 
BAKUNIN Statism and Anarchy (edited by Marshall Shatz) 
BENTHAM A Fragment on Government (introduction by Ross Harrison) 
BossuEt Politics drawn from the Very Words of Holy Scripture 
(edited by Patrick Riley) 
C1cERO On Duties (edited by M. T. Griffin and E. M. Atkins) 
CONSTANT Political Writings (edited by Biancamaria Fontana) 
FILMER Patriarcha and Other Writings (edited by Johann P. Sommerville) 
HEGEL Elements of the Philosophy of Right (edited by Allen W. Wood and 
H. B. Nisbet) 
H osBEs Leviathan (edited by Richard Tuck) 
H oOKER Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity (edited by A. S. McGrade) 
JOHN OF SALISBURY Policraticus (edited by Cary Nederman) 
K ant Political Writings (edited by H. S. Reiss and H. B. Nisbet) 
LEIBNIZ Political Writings (edited by Patrick Riley) 
L ocKE Two Treatises of Government (edited by Peter Laslett) 
Luther and Calvin on Secular Authority (edited by Harro Hopfl) 
MACHIAVELLI The Prince (edited by Quentin Skinner and Russell Price) 
J.S.Muxv On Liberty with The Subjection of Women and 
Chapters on Socialism (edited by Stefan Collini) 
MILTON Political Writings (edited by Martin Dzelzainis) 
MONTESQUIEU The Spirit of the Laws (edited by Anne M. Cohler, 
Basia Carolyn Miller and Harold Samuel Stone) 
M orE Utopia (edited by George M. Logan and Robert M. Adams) 
P AINE Political Writings (edited by Bruce Kuklick) 
P UFENDORF On the Duty of Man and Citizen According to Natural Law 
(edited by James Tully) 
The Radical Reformation (edited by Michael G. Baylor) 


[PDF page 380]


[PDF page 381]
) 


[PDF page 382]
DATE DUE’> 
AI 48 2572 
| | | 
—————= > 
, — 
| | 
—— 
| | 
————— — 
| 
pS 
| | 
== 
| 
>—_ SS 
| | | 


[PDF page 383]
BX1790 N5C613 1991 
Nicholas. 1401-1464. 
The Catholic concordance 


[PDF page 384]
EY, 
rake 
ty ‘o 
Estes 
Non 
San 
Stora? 
i! 0} 
fy a 
: ee : 
a 
3 ¢ 
Py, Ss 
S 5 
Ss 
YI: SP re 
erenroecs 
Rasatae ex 
ue 
pa ako os 
vetes 
2 
a 
nes 
ie 
YG 
BOHN: 
: 
ty 
Yes 
Ras 
Gare 
Skin 
os 
averavata 
es 
*) 
Sindh 
Res 
Re . Fe Sa6, = 
ca 
aes AST 
IS 
Oe EE 
Gers 
URE 
ee 
isan 
Ce 
ee 
Hareb 
ota 
