
98 
A TOTALLY UNCOMPROMISING LOBBY 
i,800 people of British descent in a territory which was originally 
uninhabited - people who, above all, wish to preserve their present 
relationship with the United Kingdom? Will he reaffirm that there is 
no question of proceeding with any proposal contrary to the wishes of 
the Falkland islanders? Their wishes are surely not just ‘guidance’ to 
the British Government. Surely they must be of paramount impor¬ 
tance? Has he made that absolutely clear to the Argentine Govern¬ 
ment? 
Is not the Minister aware that proposals for a leasing arrangement 
represent a major weakening of our long-held position on sovereignty 
in the Falkland Islands, and that to make them in so specific and 
public a manner is likely only to harden Argentine policy and to 
undermine the confidence of the Falkland Islanders? Will he there¬ 
fore make it clear that we shall uphold the rights of the Islanders to 
continue to make a genuinely free choice about their future, that we 
shall not abandon them and that, in spite of all the logistic difficulties, 
we shall continue to support and sustain them?


Argentine Attitudes 
When the British Empire breathed its last at Suez in 1956 it was 
confirmed to world opinion that Britain had lost the imperial will, and 
the imperial inheritance remained to be contested. Argentina, with its 
venerable claim to the Falklands, and its ineradicable belief that there 
was an old wrong to be righted, had been among the first of the heirs to 
assemble. For Argentina there were no Falkland Islanders, only colonists, 
no matter that they had been there for five generations, and Britain in 
the Falklands was a relic of colonialism. Argentines entered the post¬ 
colonial world to be dazzled at intervals by the issue of the ‘Malvinas’. 
A venturesome stage comedian in Buenos Aires had portrayed the 
Argentine Caesar, General Juan Peron, as saying, ‘Without my balcony I 
am nothing.’ From that balcony in the 1950s, Peron had thrown a 
miraculous ideological blanket over Argentina, and he had stirred 
passionate emotions. Peron told the masses that politics was not for 
politicians in banquet halls, but for them, the people themselves, to 
accomplish in the streets. In the streets, outbursts of xenophobic and 
nationalist enthusiasm, slogans and banners, from time to time pro¬ 
claimed, ‘The Malvinas are ours.’ Although Juan Peron never presented 
the Falklands to the British as a critical problem, he established a climate 
for a generation. 
After 1956, because it was considered unwise to have all the British 
eggs in the now unreliable east-of-Suez basket, the Foreign Office had 
cast about afresh. After many years of indifference, Britain had set out 
deliberately to renovate the British interest in Latin America, and 
particularly in Argentina. The diplomacy which began in secret over the 
Falklands in the 1960s was seen as offering the distinct possibility that 
Argentina’s ambition would be fulfilled. The Argentines felt that they 
had been encouraged at a meeting held in New York, in 1967, with the 
British foreign secretary, George Brown. George Brown ‘left an


100 
ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
impression’ on his opposite number. This was Dr Nicanor Costa 
Mendez, who was to serve again as Argentina’s foreign secretary when, 
fifteen years after this encounter, he returned to the post in the crucial 
months before the outbreak of the Falklands war. 
I have an excellent memory of that talk with George BrowA. He was a 
‘character’ and very sharp and intelligent. Much to my surprise he 
was really interested in the issue, and I think that he was really willing 
to do something positive. I met him, for the first time, when Argentina 
was a member of the Security Council and there was a meeting, at 
foreign minister level, because of the 1967 war.1 We took up similar 
positions, with both Brazil and Argentina very near Britain, as Britain 
was trying to maintain some sort of agreement between Arabs and 
Israelis. So, we made a very good friendship. 
We had two long talks on Malvinas. First of all, Britain had not 
voted against Resolution 2065 of the UN.2 So, when I asked George 
Brown for a meeting and he said ‘yes’, and we began to talk, I found a 
very able politician who wanted to talk and who had a good knowledge 
of the whole affair. 
Now, he did not say, ‘Yes, we will hand you the Islands’, but he 
said, ‘We can discuss this, we can see how this problem of a popula¬ 
tion can be solved’, and he said ‘We British are interested in two 
things: in keeping a good friendship with Argentina, and in having 
better communications and better trade with Argentina.’ Remember, 
that this was in 1967, and Britain was out of the Common Market at 
that time. I think that Britain was genuinely interested in improving 
its trade with Argentina. 
When it came to the Falklands, what was the actual point of agreement between 
those two things? 
We had those two good talks with George Brown about the possibility 
of reaching an agreement that could have been on the basis of recog¬ 
nition of sovereignty by the British, and, in turn, acceptance of British 
authorities, for a certain amount of time, by Argentina. That was the 
basis of the whole thing. The Labour trend was towards decolon¬ 
ization. 
George Brown was staunch Labour, in that sense, and I think he 
was committed to continue the work of Ernest Bevin in that direction. 
They had not accepted, but they had not rejected, Resolution 2065. But 
my predecessor had begun to talk with Michael Stewart,3 so my 
1 The Arab/Israeli war of 1967. 
2 The UN General Assembly resolution of December 1965 calling on Britain and 
Argentina to negotiate the Falklands issue. 
3 Foreign secretary January 1965-August 1966, and 1968-70.


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
IOI 
meeting with George Brown was not entirely new and was not some¬ 
thing completely different from what had been going on before. 
What inferences were drawn by Argentina, in terms of policy making, from 
Stewart's visit in 1966, the first by a British foreign secretary, and the emphasis 
he gave to commercial relations? 
We thought this could be a bargaining possibility. You may say 
trading ‘Trade’, for the political objectives of Argentina. 
* 
It was a personal reverse for Dr Costa Mendez when what appeared to 
be a shared objective over the Falklands with George Brown was put 
beyond reach by the hostile reaction of the House of Commons in 1968. 
It was also a lesson Costa Mendez would not forget as he watched Lord 
Carrington’s similar incapacity in 1982. 
The Argentines had been Britain’s oldest friends in Latin America. 
The Republic’s railways and its meat trade were largely the creation of 
British capital. By the turn of the century Argentina had been integrated 
into the international economy as Britain’s best client. Then, after the 
Second World War, the pro-British political class in Buenos Aires had 
been largely driven from power. A fierce denunciation of ‘foreign im¬ 
perialism’ had been the leitmotif of Peron’s foreign policy. But there was 
still a considerable fund of Argentine good will for Britain in the 1960s. 
The corollary of Britain’s resurrected interest in Argentina had been 
the need to do something about the Falklands, which had affected 
relations for more than a century and a half. After the disappointment of 
1968, therefore, everything was different. In addition, Argentina came to 
link its own national decline to that of Britain, with a belief that it had 
stuck to a relationship with Britain for too long. In the opinion of one 
Argentine foreign minister, Britain never fully understood the deeper 
feelings aroused. Oscar Camilion was Argentina’s foreign minister in 
1981 and held the post until three months before the invasion of the 
Falklands. For a time, therefore, he was Lord Carrington’s counterpart. 
It is a fact that the British never fully understood that the problem of 
the Islands was really very important in Argentina. Mainly because, 
after one hundred and fifty years of it, the Foreign Office in Britain 
believed that it was just a chronic diplomatic question that maybe, 
one day, could be dealt with. Also, at the beginning of the 1980s it was 
not easy to understand the deep frustration of Argentine society. 
Argentina was frustrated because of the failure of the military govern¬ 
ment; the armed forces were frustrated because of the stance adopted 
in dealing with Chile; it was frustrated also by the crucial problem for 
Argentina of foreign debt. The Argentine people were beginning to


102 
ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
think their future was unforeseeable. Always, this was a country 
where to live was rather easy but, at the beginning of the eighties, life 
was beginning to be difficult. Maybe for that reason the old problem 
of the Islands, the old wound, began to hurt. 
I was convinced, when I was foreign minister, that it was necessary to 
find a new way to deal with it because, for Argentina, the idea that the 
Malvinas could somehow remain ‘the last colony’ was something very 
difficult to swallow. For Argentina, the Islands meant a very important 
priority. It was not exactly the same for the United Kingdom. I received 
this impression when I had a rather long talk with Lord Carrington.4 
Among Argentines of my generation, it was accepted as a matter of fact 
that the Islands are a part of Argentine territory, always, and not as the 
subject of a campaign against the United Kingdom. 
In those days, during the thirties, the relationships between both 
countries were really excellent. But it was a fact that the Malvinas 
were Argentina’s. ‘Malvinas were Argentina’s’, it was something that 
was beyond any kind of discussion. Why? I think just looking at the 
map, is the best way to understand the problem from the Argentine 
point of the view. Of course, the fact that the territory is four hundred 
miles offshore is not a self-evident title, but in the middle of this large 
sea-desert of the South, it is more understandable. 
In any case, it is a fact that there was a gulf always between a 
country for which the Islands was really a question of her territory, of 
sovereignty, in some ways also of her dignity, and a country that, very 
understandably, considered the Islands were really a very marginal 
affair. It is, maybe, metaphysics. From the point of view of the British 
it was just a far away territory. It was not a problem of the essence, of the 
being, of the state, as it was for Argentina. 
This contrast between ‘a marginal British concern’ and something 
which was seen by Argentina as ‘the essence of the state’ is a key 
explanation of the emotional Argentine attitude to the Falklands. The 
issue was massaged as an injury to ‘national dignity’ in Buenos Aires, 
while the Argentine complaint was hardly felt in London. That is, of 
course, Argentina’s complaint. In this Argentine attitude were echoes of 
de Gaulle’s ‘a certain idea of France’. Argentina’s, likewise, was no 
modest pride. The attempted conquest of the Islands in 1982 was seen as 
the nation’s encounter with destiny. 
Roberto Guyer is a former senior Argentine diplomat involved from 
the outset, in the 1960s, in the protracted manoeuvrings of the modern 
era with Britain over the Falklands. 
4 In New York, in September 1981.


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
103 
I think we finally got the feeling that you took us a little bit for 
granted. In the sixties there were the efforts to see if we could reach 
conversations on the vital issue, which is the question of sovereignty. 
Then this lapsed, and talks went on. We were always told, ‘Well, 
there is not too great an interest in the Falkland Islands perse, but it is 
the Islanders. You’, we were told, ‘have to convince the Islanders.’ 
Thinking of it all now, in 1986,1 think it was just a comfortable way 
out, instead of simply saying, ‘We will not touch the issue. The 
Islanders will not acquiesce, and we will go on evading any solution of 
the problem.’ The evasion was ‘Let us continue. We have no interests 
really in those Islands. It’s just a question of convincing the Islanders.’ 
But the constant repetition of national ‘honour’ and national ‘dignity’, as being 
at stake would seem to reflect some deep-seated themes in Argentine culture, 
which perhaps the British insufficiently understood. What do you think they 
were? 
Well, it’s logical for us. Being a young nation we had some points 
which we thought were very much attached to that. We are not the 
only ones. Look what the Germans did to get back Heligoland.5 They 
exchanged it for a whole colony in Africa. I don’t know if it was Cecil 
Rhodes or Rudyard Kipling who would say, ‘You were changing a 
button for a whole suit’, but the Germans felt very strongly about it. 
Heligoland was German, and we felt, going back in history, that the 
Malvinas were Argentina’s, are Argentina’s. So, for us it is a question 
of national honour and national dignity, yes. 
The British always found it difficult to understand why you attached more 
importance to this issue than concentrating energies on the development of, let us 
say, the mineral wealth of Patagonia, rather than pursue claims to a territory 
which had been under British control for more than a century and a half. 
One does not exclude the other. I do not see that there was ever an 
alternative, ‘concentrate on Patagonia’ or ‘concentrate on the 
Malvinas’. Time, in itself, leads to no perfection of any title. This is 
from the legal point of view. 
Butfrom the political point of view, if the passing of time does not perfect a title it 
is difficult to imagine how a civilized world order can last. If every country with a 
claim as long as yours had recourse to force, the world would blow itself to pieces 
within a week. 
Well, without entering into what happened in 1982, I say that we 
thought our claim was legitimate. It was so legitimate that you 
5 The island in the North Sea, at the mouth of the Elbe, ceded by Britain to Germany 
in 1890 in return for concessions in East Africa.


104 
ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
continued discussing it. You did not take up Lord Palmerston’s attitude, 
‘There is nothing to discuss!’ If I might remind you, it was not the 
Argentinians who closed the doors to discussions. Jt was the British 
in their debate in the House of Commons of December 1980. If one 
reads Hansard one can really feel that the door has been closed.6 7 
What is your response to what one Argentine political writer1 has said since the 
Falklands war, that ‘Argentina's history as an organized country has shown a 
repeated tendency to defy certain aspects of the international order. A refusal to 
align herself in two world wars; her refusal to accept the decision of the Arbitral 
Court over the Beagle Channel dispute in igj8; and the war of ig82 ’? Are these 
things not a long-term trend which is proving increasingly costly to Argentina? 
Yes, we have had our costs. However - being neutral in two world 
wars as something akin to immorality? Switzerland was neutral. 
Sweden was neutral in World War II. Were the Irish immoral? I know 
Mr Churchill was not happy with Ireland. But people could not say 
that we did something morally wrong. As to the Arbitral Court, we 
thought it had acted ultra vires and that it had decided issues that had 
not been brought before it. I cannot fathom that in any way, shape or 
form we ever went against any of the tenets of the international 
civilized community. What that Argentine historian said might be 
politically arguable, but from a moral and legal point of view I see no 
validity. 
But how far does the disposition to challenge great or greater powers stem from a 
deeply heldfeeling in Argentine culture about two aspects in particular: a feeling 
that Argentina has always lost territory and a feeling that Argentina was or 
should be a greater power? 
We are not challenging greater powers, we simply wish to reaffirm 
our own individuality. Our relations with the UK have always been 
excellent. 
Is that part of the problem? 
I think it is a part of the problem. There is a strong case here of people 
who are very close to the British. We were always very close. My own 
wife is of Scottish descent. We were also a little bit hurt during the 
question of 1982. There were strong things said on both sides. I will 
not diminish the things we said of the UK at that time. But from your 
side, one sometimes felt transported to the time of Queen Elizabeth 
the First. The whole anti-Latin, anti-Catholic bias, the word ‘dago’, 
6 The hostile reception given to Minister of State Nicholas Ridley’s leaseback 
proposal. 
7 Carlos Escude, Buenos Aires Herald, April 1986.


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
105 
was thrown at us. Showing ‘the lesser breeds’ where they get off. This 
Third World, in Charles Dickens’s words, ‘must comply, like the 
deserving poor’! 
That seems to me to confirm the suspicion that there are these deep-seated 
frustrations in Argentina, that you had, for example, a foQtin the ‘Third World' 
and wished to be a great power. A sense of grievance - Argentina alone, 
embattled, taking on the world? 
No, not at all, that is utterly untrue. You may think that there is one 
big difference. It is that we are at different times of history. You have 
had one revolution. You have passed your time of intense nationalism. 
God knows you had it! I could go on about the war of Jenkins’s Ear8 
and God knows how many other episodes.’ 
The name ‘Malvinas’ derives from French and is the Hispanic version 
of ‘Malouines’, the seal-hunters and fishermen from St Malo in 
Brittany, who went there in the early eighteenth century. By 1981, the 
Islands which the Spanish at the height of their Empire had not thought 
worth a name, were within a few months of being thought worth a war. 
This rapid evolution of the Falklands issue, late in 1981, as it went from 
being crucial for Argentina to being critical, took place almost a year 
after Nicholas Ridley’s leaseback proposal was furiously attacked in the 
House of Commons. 
In 1981 both sides were stuck in a classic impasse. For the British, the 
situation created by years of barren exchanges concerning sovereignty 
echoed Churchill’s description of Britain’s bed of nails in Ulster, as 
conveyed by the dreary prospect in Tyrone and Fermanagh, that ‘The 
situation was desperate but never serious.’ 
The British detected some similarly baffled overtones in Argentine 
attitudes when, six months before the conflict, in the Autumn of 1981, 
Lord Carrington met the Argentine foreign minister, Dr Oscar 
Camilion. 
It is a paradox, but Malvinas was never the immediate preoccupation 
of foreign ministers. I have the reputation of being one of the first 
foreign ministers in Argentina who began to study the problem of 
Malvinas, trying to find a new approach to the problem of 
sovereignty, for instance. Why did the foreign ministers never study 
Malvinas, on both sides? Because it was not a matter of urgency. For 
8 An English merchant captain who, in 1731, allegedly lost an ear (some said it had 
been in the pillory) when boarded by a Spanish sloop. The popular clamour forced 
Walpole to consent to war against Spain.


io6 
ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
instance, when I met Lord Carrington in 1981, the impression that I 
received was, first of all, that Lord Carrington had a very superficial 
grasp of the problem. That was really understandable, because Lord 
Carrington was a very busy, a very important foreign minister, and he 
had a lot of matters of higher priority - at least from his point of view. 
I said to the Argentine ambassador to Britain after the meeting that 
for Lord Carrington the Islands are the 214th priority - joking of 
course. 
I got the impression, when I presented the problem of the 
Falklands, he was in some ways thinking ‘Why is this fellow question¬ 
ing, and with such a marginal problem, such a busy man as I?’ And it 
was marginal. Even for Argentina, the question never received the 
level of attention that it really deserved. For that reason people never 
tried to find sophisticated approaches, and it needed sophisticated 
approaches. 
Look, in the Franks Report, there is a paragraph summarizing a 
telegram sent by Ambassador Williams9 after a conversation with 
me.10 I say that, ‘For serious and constructive negotiations it was 
necessary to tackle all the component parts of what was a complex 
issue.’11 I was trying to suggest to your ambassador in Buenos Aires 
the possibility of exploring new ways to solve it; for example, the 
differing elements that composed the idea of sovereignty. Sovereignty 
is a formal concept, but it is also the sum of various things - rights 
and tasks and so on. There was also the possibility of analysing the 
different groups of islands in different ways; even in the case of the 
Malvinas group, to stress that there were almost deserted islands, 
islands with just a few shepherds, and islands with a community. I 
thought it might be possible to have different approaches. 
Ambassador Williams reported to London, on this October 14th meeting, that 
‘Meaningful negotiations would have to be long and difficult. ’ That was taken by 
the Foreign Office as Argentine recognition that no early solution was obtain¬ 
able. It was welcomed in the Foreign Office as showing reluctance on Argentina’s 
part to move to confrontation. Is that an adequate reflection of what you were 
trying to convey? 
Yes. I was trying to convey first of all that it was necessary to start 
meaningful negotiations, and it was necessary to find a new approach. 
In those days I was toying with something like a Hong Kong style 
approach - essentially the difference of functions. My idea was a bit 
9 British ambassador to Argentina. 
10 14 October 1981; Franks Report, para. 105. 
11 Franks Report, para. 105.


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
IO7 
intellectual, if you wish. It started from the old idea of sovereignty, the 
concept of sovereignty in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, 
by Bentham or Hobbes, that always distinguished between formal 
sovereignty and elements that really integrate the notion of 
sovereignty. For instance, defence, justice, taxes, education and so on 
- functions of the state. I meant the possibility of,an approach to the 
problem starting with functions and then, only after that, the global 
problem of sovereignty. However, I insist that usually both sides 
considered the issue in a very superficial and elementary way. From 
the point of view of the British Government, the typical approach was 
self-determination for the Islanders. From the Argentine point of 
view, it was formal sovereignty. 
Ambassador Anthony Williams’s talk with Foreign Minister Camilion 
in October-1981, six months before the Argentine invasion, disclosed 
this different emphasis, therefore, compared to the historical Argentine 
position, which had always been that sovereignty was indivisible. The 
approach Camilion ‘toyed with’ was to winnow out the differences 
between real possession, expressed in the functions of actual dominion, 
from the disputed ‘global’ question of sovereignty. Camilion’s construc¬ 
tive thoughts were felt to offer scope for ‘protracted dialogue’.12 How 
brief the vision was! 
At this time, in retrospect, Lord Carrington underestimated his own 
importance as seen in Argentine eyes. The fact that he had raised 
expectations by his performance in reaching a settlement over a really 
divisive issue, Rhodesia, is attested by Camilion’s successor just six 
months before the war broke out, Dr Nicanor Costa Mendez. 
I had put great expectations in Lord Carrington’s ability to deal with 
international disputes, and I had followed his attitudes and his 
policies in Rhodesia. There he made an excellent effort and a very 
successful effort to settle the problem. While I had not met him, I 
thought that he was the man that could deal with this affair. 
How far were you aware that his success with that very problem, Rhodesia, was 
causing Lord Carrington difficulties over the Falklands within the Conservative 
party and the government? 
Yes, of course I was aware of that. Otherwise I would be having 
champagne! 
Lord Carrington decided not to take the lead but, instead, to ask 
Argentina for constructive proposals to resolve the dispute. For doing so 
12 Franks Report, para. 105.


io8 
ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
he was criticized by the Franks Inquiry, as thereby acknowledging that 
Britain was in a weak position, and thus passing the initiative to 
Argentina. If the Argentine diplomats always asked more of Lord 
Carrington than they did of themselves, it is clear that they expected 
much from him, for reasons amplified by Oscar Camilion. 
We considered, in the Chancery, that Mrs Thatcher’s government 
had five problems to solve: Rhodesia, Belize, Hong Kong, Gibraltar 
and the Malvinas, in that order. Maybe we aspired to change the 
order a bit by giving Malvinas priority vis-a-vis Gibraltar, even 
though we believed that Gibraltar was perhaps a more difficult 
problem because of the size of its population13 and, obviously, it is 
different in the defence priorities of the United Kingdom. We were 
extremely interested in the realistic approach of the Conservative 
Government to the Rhodesia problem. The solution of Rhodesia 
demonstrated that the British government meant business. 
Therefore when Rhodesia was settled by Lord Carrington, you saw at once an 
opportunity to accelerate your diplomacy over the Falklands? 
Maybe. Our concrete reaction was something very obvious. These 
kind of settlements are easier with Conservative governments. A 
typical example was Nixon with China. Also, we appreciated that 
Lord Carrington was no common foreign minister, he was a foreign 
minister with ‘volume’. What’s more, it was our appreciation that 
there was an agenda in the British Government, on all these out¬ 
standing problems. 
Such disposition as there was in Argentina in 1981 to modify its 
historical all or nothing approach’ on sovereignty was conceded in 
Camilion s analysis that Argentina needed a more sophisticated and 
flexible diplomacy. It suggests that leaseback, which addressed the 
central issue - sovereignty - might well have been accepted by 
Argentina, had Lord Carrington been prepared to force it through 
Cabinet and Commons at home. But, as the Franks Report discloses, 
‘The time was never considered to be ripe.’ The adoption by Lord 
Carrington, albeit temporary, of the ‘doctrine of unripe time’ meant, 
from Argentina’s point of view, protracted stalemate. This coincided 
with the appearance of new disparities in the balance of power between 
Britain and Argentina. The implications of Britain’s far-reaching 
defence appraisal in 1981, it is clear, had a seductive significance for 
Buenos Aires, as Nicanor Costa Mendez explains. 
r3 Approximately 26,000, compared with the Falklands’ 1,800.


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
109 
I think that there were signs that the British government had to 
concentrate on other problems, mainly for economic reasons. There 
was one sign to which I really paid attention when I went back to the 
ministry. That sign was the Defence Debate of 1981, where the 
problems of security were really debated, and the heart of the 
problem was discussed. I detected that the policyjof Britain was, first, 
to reduce the defence budget, and that Mrs Thatcher and her 
ministers were very adamant about that, and for the future, the Royal 
Navy was to be concentrated on the submarines, on the Trident, 
rather than the surface fleet. To that we paid attention. 
And what did you conclude? 
My conclusion was that it would be very difficult for Britain to 
maintain the Islands without our cooperation or collaboration. And 
that the Communications Agreement, and all that was connected with 
the Communications Agreement, was going to be of paramount 
importance. Also, that Chile was going to become more than a pawn 
in this chess game. But my first conclusion was that either Britain was 
losing interest in the zone or, because of the defence budget, Britain 
was compelled to leave the zone and pay less attention to the area. We 
thought these economic reasons would at least offset the power of the 
Falkland Islands lobby. 
The belief that the Thatcher government, preoccupied with economic 
problems which, as they were going to reduce the role of the Royal 
Navy’s surface fleet, made it less likely Britain would prove a deter¬ 
mined opponent over the Falklands, now began to reshape the Argen¬ 
tine analysis. For its part, Argentina, in 1981, was experiencing its worst 
economic crisis of the century, with a rapid increase in social unrest. 
And who does not know that a foreign war has often put a stop to civil 
discords? 
The Falklands crisis of 1982 approached with Britain having no policy 
other than to keep the negotiations going, while maintaining the status 
quo indefinitely. The role which these trends in British policy making 
performed, in encouraging Argentina to reunite domestic opinion on a 
wave of national enthusiasm, was reflected in new designs for forceful 
action. 
In December 1981 new leaders emerged at the head of the military 
Junta: General Galtieri, the army commander-in-chief, and Admiral 
Jorge Anaya of the navy. If there was no progress in negotiations over the 
Falklands with Britain, what was it this new government, which had 
brought back Dr Nicanor Costa Mendez as foreign secretary, was 
threatening to do?


no 
ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
I can assure you, and I can show documents, that at that time my idea 
was to put on as much diplomatic pressure as possible during the year 
1982. It did not occur to me, and I did not discuss the problem with 
General Galtieri or Almirante Anaya, before the Georgias,14 of 
occupying the Islands. President Galtieri had told me that he had 
other plans, alternative plans, but he did not give me any instructions 
to make diplomatic moves, and he did not request my opinion on the 
possibility of invading or occupying the Islands. I did not discuss that 
possibility with the Junta before the 22nd and 23rd of March 1982, 
when the Georgia affair came up. 
You are speaking only of your own ministry, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs? 
The ministry that’s in charge of political and of diplomatic affairs. So 
at the diplomatic and political level this had not been examined, 
analysed, or discussed or planned. 
Surely we can agree at this distance, because a good deal has been published to the 
effect, that the Junta, if not you, had ordered a military alternative if negotia¬ 
tions failed? 
The Junta had ordered a military alternative, as Britain had ordered 
military preparations too, as any country having diplomatic problems 
with another would order a military alternative or preparations. Of 
one thing I can assure you, from the political and diplomatic point of 
view there were no plans to support a military attitude. 
So you are saying, for the benefit of future historians, that when this new govern¬ 
ment came to power in December ig8i, asfar as you were concerned, it was only 
updating contingency plans ? It did not have a completely new blueprint in order 
to deal with the Falkland Islands issue? 
Well, ‘updating’ or having new plans, there is more than a shade of 
difference between the two. Probably they were preparing new 
military plans. But, as you perhaps know, military plans for occupa¬ 
tion of the Islands had been prepared many times in Argentina, and 
many years before the new government. So, the new government 
either updated the old plans or, and this is a second alternative, and I 
think the true one, it prepared new military plans. 
But as far as I know, and I have discussed the problem at length, 
the Junta did not make the decision of occupying the Islands before 
the Georgia affair. Perhaps, of this I’m not sure, the Junta had in mind 
the possibility of a military demonstration, or even a military ‘touch 
and go’. But this was discussed at a military level, and not at political 
level, and no political decision was made on this direction. 
14 That is, before the affair of the ‘scrap workers’ on South Georgia.


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
III 
But do you confirm that the only place where a military demonstration, or a 
military ‘touch and go ' as you call it, would have been credible in terms of 
demonstrating Argentina's seriousness of purpose, would have been on the 
Falkland Islands, at Port Stanley? 
No doubt about that. What I am saying is this was a possibility, not a 
decision. That was just an alternative. 
Whether Costa Mendez was being disingenuous in supposing the 
military leaders viewed this as an alternative, rather than an opportunity, 
awaits another judgement. At least, it seems, he was party to the 
knowledge that a ‘touch and go’ invasion of the Falklands was planned, 
if not decided. But the Foreign Ministry had little leverage over the 
Argentine Navy, the crucial element in the military government. 
Events accelerated surrounding the last set of talks held between 
Britain and Argentina in New York in February 1982, and were followed 
by the affair of the ‘Argentine scrap workers’ on South Georgia. This 
was the immediate prelude to the Argentine invasion. At this time, an 
informed witness in the Argentine Navy, who was intimately involved 
and who did the planning and was the operational commander for the 
Argentine landing on the Falklands, ‘Operation Rosario’, was Rear- 
Admiral Carlos Busser. It would seem the Argentine Navy was not, 
this time, just ‘dusting off an old contingency but, indeed, drawing up a 
new blueprint. How were his orders to update the invasion plan for the 
Falklands in January 1982 interpreted by Admiral Busser? 
The order was not to update the plan but to draft a plan from scratch. 
Argentina had made many plans in the past to recover the Malvinas, 
but the order we got was to make out a new plan. We started doing so 
in January 1982. The basic idea was to negotiate throughout 1982, but 
at the same time have a military plan, just in case the negotiations 
failed. In that case we would take the military option. But that would 
be only towards the end of 1982, or the beginning of 1983. 
Was this completely new plan you began to draft in January worked out in the 
expectation that the talks with Britain in February 1982 would succeed or fail? 
The military plan was to go side by side with diplomatic efforts. 
Argentina was hoping for diplomatic success, but we had long 
experience of negotiations which never achieved a solution, and so 
we drafted a military plan in case those negotiations failed. 
But there is a difference of emphasis in January from all preceding years? There 
was a real probability of recourse to military action to solve the problem of the 
Falklands?


112 
ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
Yes. There were preparations in case the negotiations failed. 
The difference, I think, is that the British acknowledge the likelihood of military 
action but cannot quite bring themselves to believe that it will happen, whereas 
by January or February 1982 you are expecting that will be necessary? 
On 27th January 198215 Argentina proposed to Great Britain a round of 
negotiations that should take a year, and received no reply. It is a crucial 
moment. On27thJanuary 1982 we made our proposal, asking for a reply 
to be delivered to us before the negotiations began again at the UN in 
New York in February 1982. But we never got a reply. That was the 
detonator for the unilateral communique issued by Argentina after the 
New York talks. We were drawing up a military plan, but that does not 
mean that we had taken the decision to invade. As you know, in military 
terms, there is a huge difference between a plan and an order. 
What therefore decided the timing of the ‘execution ’order? 
It is a long story. On March 19th a group of Argentine scrap workers 
arrived on the Georgias to dismantle whaling stations on San Pedro 
island. It led to a misunderstanding and a misinterpretation by the 
British Government. Positions then toughened and this leads to the 
decision to recover the Malvinas and the Georgias. 
The British came to the view that the presence of the scrap dealers on South 
Georgia was being used by the Argentine Navy as a front to establish a presence 
there. Captain Barker ofHMS Endurance sent a signal saying there were indi¬ 
cations of collusion between Senor Davidoffand the Argentine Navy.16 Naval 
Headquarters in Buenos Aires had congratulated the Bahia Buen Suceso ‘ona 
successful operation ’.17 Why should the British not have suspected collusion? 
Captain Barker’s message is rather curious. He sent it while he was 
sailing from the Malvinas to the Georgias on the 22nd March. He was 
carrying on board marines to remove the Argentine workers on the 
Georgias. Now, it must be said that the Argentine Navy transported 
DavidofFs men, on a navy cargo ship, because the navy for many 
years has run a short-haul service to develop and promote economic 
activities in the south. So when Davidoff was unsuccessful in getting 
British cooperation to take his men there, the Argentine Navy decided 
to go ahead because it was promoting activities in its own territory. 
!5 Argentina proposed the establishment of a permanent negotiating commission with 
a fixed agenda, to have a duration of one year, ‘to peacefully, definitively and rapidly solve 
the dispute’ (Franks Report, para. 126). 
16 Senor Davidoff was an Argentine scrap merchant with a contract to dismantle the 
old whaling station on South Georgia. 
17 Franks Report, para. 175. The Bahia Buen Suceso was an Argentine naval support 
vessel.


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
n3 
It must be said that Argentines consider that the Georgias are 
theirs, in the same way as the British say they are British territory. For 
the Argentine Navy, therefore, this task that had been asked of them 
was just promoting a service in Argentine territory. 
The British version was that they were not just scrap workers, but included 
military personnel, and the Argentine flag had been raised. 
Your question points to one of the most crucial episodes that led to 
the major misunderstanding which arose on March 19th. The British 
Antarctic Survey18 itself had to change its story when, two days later, 
the British Government asked them to be more specific. They had 
thought that it was military personnel, because of the type of clothes 
people were wearing. In fact the ship Bahia Buen Suceso had no 
military personnel, they were all civilians. This trip of the scrap 
dealers was well known to the British Government. They knew who 
the workers were, what ship they were sailing in, and the date the ship 
sailed from Buenos Aires. All this was known officially to the British 
Government. Therefore it was not an Argentine ‘presence’ in the 
Georgias, but just a contract that had been signed in 1979, between a 
British and an Argentine firm, and with the knowledge of the 
Argentine and British parties. 
The British response to the Argentine scientific station established on Southern 
Thule in ig/6 was more or less to let it pass. At least it was an episode not made 
public for eighteen months. Should we suppose that when the British responded 
as they did over the presence of the scrap dealers in South Georgia, there, as was 
thought, in collusion with the Argentine navy, Argentina then decided 
negotiations were going to get nowhere? 
The Thule episode was known to British intelligence in Buenos Aires 
but, for reasons I do not know, it was not disclosed to the British 
public. Nevertheless a British ship did sail to the area and ratified the 
presence of Argentina in Thule. 
Concerning the Georgias the British knew that Davidoff had 
signed this contract and was going to send his workmen there. This 
time the reactions were different. Why is that so? My personal 
opinion is that when Davidoff had signed this contract in 1979, with a 
British firm, to dismantle the whaling station, the British then had the 
Antarctic Survey and the Endurance as a support and a continuous 
presence in the area. But when the workers go there in 1982, the 
situation has changed entirely. The British Antarctic Survey was 
going to leave the area, in 1982, and HMS Endurance would be out of 
18 The British Antarctic Survey observed the Bahia Buen Suceso in Leith Harbour and a 
sizeable party of civilian and military personnel ashore (Franks Report, para. 169 ff.).


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
04 
commission by the end of 1982. The prospect was that, in a matter of 
months, the Argentine workers in the Georgias would be there but 
without a simultaneous British presence. 
That, in fact, would establish the Argentine as the only presence on South 
Georgia? 
That is correct. That is what was going to happen,.and that is 
precisely what the British did not want to happen. 
But precisely what you did? 
We did nothing. The workers just went there. This provoked a British 
reaction which started a whole new story. The threat, issued by the 
British, decided Argentina that it was not going tb accept a with¬ 
drawal under threats. We decided to support our presence there, in 
view of what we considered was an ultimatum and an aggression. So 
another crucial date is March 23rd, when Britain sent its ultimatum. 
That determined our future conduct. Because we were aware that if 
the British did not act then, it was only because they did not feel they 
were strong enough. That is, if there was to be a confrontation, Great 
Britain was not sure to win at that time. 
Now, on the 25th of March we get reports saying that there were 
British ships sailing towards the south. Argentina therefore had a very 
short period in which to act, and during that period Great Britain 
could not act. After that the position would be absolutely the opposite. 
The British could act, and Argentina would not be in any position to 
stop the scrap workers being removed from the Georgias. So we 
should consider the situation on the basis of the evaluation we made 
on the 23rd and 24th of March. According to press reports Great 
Britain had despatched a nuclear submarine. The Franks Report says 
it was on the 29th of March but our press was saying the 25th of 
March. It is only a difference of four days. What is certain, the ships 
were sailing south. Great Britain had said it was going to evict the 
workers from South Georgia, unless they were taken away by the 
Argentinians themselves. It was not possible for us to wait until the 
end of 1982, when the British presence in the area would have 
diminished. The problem was immediate. Very soon the workers 
would be evicted. Argentina just could not wait. 
On the 23rd March when the British ultimatum was received we 
then thought we had some days ahead of us to carry out this opera¬ 
tion. The Argentine government had set up a planning committee,19 
and it had been agreed that in no way would this operation20 take 
19 Rear-Admiral Busser was the naval member of this planning committee. 
20 Operation Rosario, the Argentine invasion of the Falklands.


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
n5 
place before the 15th of May. Planning was being done slowly, there¬ 
fore, and totally independent from negotiations about the crisis on 
the Georgias. When the ultimatum came, the evidence was that when 
the British ships arrived the workers would be violently removed 
from South Georgia. 
The Junta consulted the planning committee on the 24th of March 
about the earliest day on which the operation could be mounted. The 
reply was given on the 26th March. It said the Argentine forces could 
be ready to sail on the 28th of March. This meant, in effect, the opera¬ 
tion could be carried out on the 1st of April. 
The overall situation, at the time, was set up in the following terms. 
British forces are heading south. Either we continue negotiations, 
which would not solve the problem but would give the British ships 
time to arrive. Or we could send our claim to the UN Security Council, 
but there the British had a veto and the prospect was dim. Third was the 
military solution which would force Britain to negotiate. The basic idea 
was to recover the islands with a small force, and leave a small force 
there. As we did. Of all these alternatives, only the military option 
offered the promise of a solution. All others would have meant humilia¬ 
tion for Argentina when the British ships arrived at South Georgia. 
The dominant influence in these considerations which led to invasion was 
the navy commander, and the navy member of the three-man leadership 
of the military Junta, Admiral Jorge Anaya. Admiral Anaya was in deten¬ 
tion in Buenos Aires when these interviews were being recorded and the 
new government of President Alfonsin preferred that he should remain 
inaccessible. There is important evidence at first hand of Anaya’s control¬ 
ling belief that a steady decline in British military capabilities made it 
improbable Argentina would have to fight. It comes from the Supreme 
Allied Commander Atlantic at the time, Admiral Harry Train, United 
States Navy. Shortly after the Falklands conflict, Train personally 
‘debriefed’ Admiral Anaya, for a classified American study of the war. 
The evidence is what Anaya told me personally. However, he took it 
back one previous decade, to 1956, by pointing out that in the Suez 
crisis of 1956 the United States failed to support the United 
Kingdom. You should add to that his perception of an eroding 
national will, and an eroding maritime capability on the part of the 
UK. He had a political and military situation where at best he could 
hope for United States neutrality - he never did hope for United 
States support - he hoped for United States neutrality, and he 
thought that would occur. He thought also that Her Majesty’s 
Government lacked the national will to respond to military pressure.


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
Il6 
In addition, he thought the Royal Navy lacked the capability to 
respond eight thousand miles from home. 
What did Anaya say determined the timing of the Argentine invasion? 
When the BBC announced, I believe it was March 17th, that HMS 
Superb had sailed from Gibraltar,21 Anaya felt, as he told me, that this 
was his last opportunity to carry out his life’s ambition to retake the 
Malvinas Islands for Argentina. He said, when this nuclear-powered 
submarine arrived on the scene, it would not be possible to execute 
the surface operations that would be required to place Argentine 
troops ashore at Port Stanley. The window of opportunity was limited 
by the steaming time it would take HMS Superb to get from Gibraltar 
to the vicinity of the Falklands. 
His decision was based on a BBC broadcast? 
Right. That was a ‘war-starter’, that is what Anaya describes as a 
‘war-starter’. That announcement turned out to be false. But based 
on that announcement he decided to execute a contingency plan. 
They had always had contingency plans to do this. He had just 
recently updated it. This contingency plan had called for an execu¬ 
tion in the summer of 1982, not an early date like February, March or 
April. He decided to advance it because, if he did not, he would never 
be able to do it. He said that when HMS Superb arrived it would be 
just like back in the seventies22 when the nuclear submarine was on 
the scene for a long time, and they never knew when it left. They did 
not know when it was safe to start operating with freedom in the 
vicinity of the Falklands again. 
This was a question examined by the Franks Commission; whether the dispatch 
of a nuclear submarine in the crisis of igyy did act as a deterrent. Lord Carring¬ 
ton asked his officials, ‘Did they know about it?’, and subsequently took the view 
that if the Argentines did not know about it, it could not have been a deterrent. 
What was Admiral Anaya’s response to that? 
Anaya obviously knew about it. He knew about the presence of the 
Royal Navy submarine in the vicinity of the Falklands in the 1970s 
because he referred to it.23 
21 The BBC has no record of any such report on this day. The decision to sail the first 
British nuclear-powered submarine for the Falklands was taken on Monday 29 March 
(Franks Report, para. 331). 
22 Action was taken by the Callaghan government in 1977, when two frigates and a 
nuclear-powered submarine were deployed to the area in order to ‘buttress negotiations’ 
(Franks Report, para. 327). 
23 In contrast, Rear-Admiral Busser told me, ‘We did not know. Argentina did not 
have the means to detect their presence and the Argentine attitude was not conditioned 
by the presence or absence of British ships.’


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
117 
Anaya is unequivocal, is he, about this? They did know in igyy and therefore it 
was a deterrent? 
I cannot take it that next step forward but, since no invasion occurred, 
since the Argentines did nothing militarily, it was in effect a deterrent. 
Why is a submarine, which is invisible, a deterrent? What did Anaya say about 
that? 
Let me tell you what I think about that first. A submarine is a lousy 
peacetime naval-presence vehicle. It is nofan effective way to influence 
events in favour of a nation in peacetime. But you must have sub¬ 
marines if you are a major maritime power. You must have submarines 
in order to possess that level of war-fighting capability that will deter 
war. If you do not have a clearly perceived ability to fight a maritime 
war, then you risk failing to deter war. Submarines are an essential part 
of your war-fighting capability. Therefore you must have them. 
If you want to influence events, to prevent coercion, or to protect 
your interests then a submarine is not a good vehicle to send, for a 
number of reasons, not the least of which is that they are invisible. 
The best ‘event-influencing’ force in the history of the maritime 
world is the carrier task group. I mean a real carrier. Submarines? 
They scare people. People don’t understand them. They don’t see 
them. They don’t know how they will relate to a series of events they 
have in mind. They can push you past the threshold of war, which is 
what happened in the case of the Falkland Islands, I am personally 
convinced - just as Anaya is - that that was the ‘war-starter’. 
That decided the actual timing, not Argentina’s intention. 
The timing and the decision. To understand the Argentines you have 
to accept that, for years, they have had on the shelf military plans to 
‘retake’ - that is their term - ‘retake’ the Falkland Islands. The 
British would say ‘seize’. From their perspective their plan was to 
‘retake’ the Malvinas for Argentina. They have had active contin¬ 
gency plans to do that for years and years. They update them at their 
naval war college and in the naval staff. When Anaya assumed the 
mantle of chief of navy staff in Argentina, and was the navy member of 
the Junta, the first thing he did was update24 the plan which he himself 
had written four or five years before. 
When Anaya heard a news report, false as it proved, of the dispatch of a nuclear 
submarine, HMS Superb, how do his actions after that conform to the idea that 
this was a determining factorfor him? 
24 Cf. Rear-Admiral Busser, who says, ‘The order was not to update the plan but to 
draft a plan from scratch' (see p. in).


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
118 
His order to Vice-Admiral Lombardo, to execute the plan, was given 
within two hours of the announcement on BBC. And at the time he told 
Vice-Admiral Lombardo to execute the plan, he said that he would give 
the execution date within a day or so, which he did. I believe that the 
decision on the execution date was determined in large measure by 
Lombardo’s response as to how long it would take him to ‘load on’ and 
execute. We had an American officer, an exchange officer on one of 
their ships - on the Belgrano, as a matter of fact. 
On the Belgrano ?Did he survive? 
They put him ashore, and sent him away. That little piece of informa¬ 
tion did not get picked up in the intelligence circuits. 
British ? Or A merican ? 
Neither British nor American. 
What is Anaya's version of the South Georgia incident, the events which 
accompanied the landing by Argentine scrap dealers led by Mr Davidoff on 
South Georgia? 
That the initial Davidoff venture, as conceived by Davidoff, was a bona 
fide business deal. Davidoff was a scrap dealer. He purchased three 
whaling stations to dismantle for scrap in the South Georgia islands. 
Being rather a careful man with his money he tried to get free trans¬ 
portation for that scrap. He asked the British if they would let him send 
his scrap home on HMS Endurance in the course of one of Endurance's 
visits to South Georgia. He was turned down. He then asked the Argen¬ 
tine Navy if he could use one of their support ships, either the Antarctic 
support ship, or the Falklands support ship, to bring the scrap back. At 
that time the Argentine Navy recognized that there was a potential for 
establishing, in a clandestine way, the same type of presence in South 
Georgia that they had established in South Thule. They, therefore, 
developed a plan, called Operation Alpha, which called for inserting 
military people into DavidofFs party and leaving them behind when 
Davidoff left. If Operation Alpha were to be implemented it called for 
replacing some of DavidofFs people with trained commandos. 
So, what started as an innocent scrap-dealing enterprise was taken over as a 
military operation by the Junta? 
The plan was not executed. It was cancelled, approximately a month 
before Davidoff sailed, for reasons I did not fully understand. 
I was going to say, why was it cancelled? 
I do not have the rationale to share that with you. I can tell you that I 
have seen the documentary evidence that it was cancelled. And the 
Davidoff party consisted of forty bona fide workers.


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
119 
It is tempting, more plausible perhaps, to see it as the exploitation of their experi¬ 
ence on South Thule, when there had been no immediate British response, and 
this was another such probe. When it did not, on South Georgia, meet with the 
same response as Southern Thule, then they decide to make it a military 
operation? 
It is tempting. But I am satisfied, as a historian, that they did not. But 
I can see where there is a basis for some scepticism. But I do not share 
it. I do not think the operation was executed. 
What did Anaya give to you as the reasons for his fundamental misreading of all 
the signals? He misunderstands Mrs Thatcher, the United States does not 
exhibit ‘benevolent neutrality ’? 
He believed that on the basis of the events of 1956, when the United 
States failed to support the UK in the Suez crisis, the United States 
would remain neutral in the case of conflict between Argentina and 
the United Kingdom. Added to this was the fact that in the year prior 
to the Falkland Islands conflict, there had been a long series of visits 
by high-level political and military authorities to Argentina, which 
indicated to him that there was a thawing of the rather cold relation¬ 
ships that had existed prior to that time, and that the United States’ 
current government saw that there were definite mutual interests 
between the United States and Argentina that were of value to both 
countries. 
How did he think, though, that having carried out the invasion, he could manage 
the crisis that he had promoted? 
Anaya thought - and these are his words to me - that he was just 
‘giving a nudge to diplomacy’, by landing five hundred troops in Port 
Stanley. 
He certainly gave it a nudge! 
He certainly gave it a nudge, right. Even weeks after the landing, the 
Argentine leadership believed that they were still under crisis 
management mode, whereas the UK believed they were at war, and 
correctly so. So we had one nation believing they were fighting a war, 
and another nation that thought they were ‘crisis managing’. It was 
not until the Belgrano was sunk that the hard fact came home to the 
Argentines that they really were at war. 
What did Anaya say he had supposed would be the British reactions to his ‘nudge 
to diplomacy’? 
He said, categorically, that he did not believe the British would 
respond militarily to the landing in Port Stanley. He went on to say 
that, if the British did react militarily, he at no time thought that he


120 
ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
could prevail in a military conflict. It was perhaps for this reason that 
they kept themselves in the mind-set of‘crisis management’. 
But that makes him sound irrational in the action he took. 
Neither Anaya nor Galtieri were irrational. I believe they were the 
captives of the cultural background and their heritage - a heritage 
that had not involved fighting a war for a hundred years. 
So it boils down to this: Anaya took the action he did because he did not believe he 
would have to fight? 
Precisely correct. 
Admiral Harry Train bears witness to Anaya’s assumption that Britain 
would accept a fait accompli and that therefore he was only ‘giving a 
nudge to diplomacy’ by landing at Port Stanley. If so, it was with an 
uncommonly blunt instrument. The belief in the coup de main, the short, 
decisive war, is among the most ancient of human hallucinations. 
If Admiral Jorge Anaya considered he was the surf at the edge of the 
wave of Argentina’s advance to national dignity, history may feel he 
could be forgiven his illusions. At least the militarism so peremptorily 
summoned by Argentina was based on perceptions more widely shared. 
Nicanor Costa Mendez acknowledges that Suez had been analysed by 
the Argentine foreign office as an appropriate model for likely British 
and American responses to the resort to force over the Falklands. 
Yes, it was analysed in two ways. One, as a USA intervention in order 
to prevent the extension of a war, and two, as a token of the end of a 
certain British foreign policy. To put it in Mr Healey’s words, I think, 
‘From now on, Britain will be a European power and no longer a 
global power.’ So it had no definite influence, but we paid attention to 
Suez, as we paid attention to the USA intervention in the Yom 
Kippur war. 
But the important thing about Suez was the United States, and United 
Nations, both proved restraints on what Anthony Eden tried to do. It would seem 
that you expected much the same sort of thing to happen this time? 
This is correct. Yes. We placed expectations in the United States’ 
intervention as a mediator. Let me talk just a bit more about our 
expectations concerning Britain. I think that there were gross mis¬ 
perceptions. I think that Britain thought that we were moving 
exclusively for domestic reasons. And we thought that Britain would 
react only at international level, and for international reasons. But, 
much to our surprise, we realized, afterwards, that Britain was 
reacting mostly for domestic reasons.


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
121 
What do you mean by that, for domestic reasons ’? 
I mean that the so called ‘Thatcher factor’ was a very important 
factor, and that Mrs Thatcher was very much interested in promoting 
her image. 
But that is tantamount to saying that Britain, given the opportunity, deliberately 
sought the war. This did not convince the world at large, k convinced nobody in 
the United Nations, nor in the European Community. So how is one to under¬ 
stand you? The war was caused by your invasion of the Falkland Islands. 
Yes, but the invasion of the Falklands, or the occupation of the 
Falklands, was caused by a long-time British attitude and, in my 
judgement, mismanagement of the Georgia crisis by the British 
government. Really, a gross exaggeration of the Georgia crisis. 
The invasion which Rear-Admiral Anaya had planned, or conceived, as 
‘a nudge to diplomacy’ was intended for the British summer of 1982, 
winter in the Antarctic. It was advanced to April 1982, the Argentines 
have maintained, because of the way Britain responded to the South 
Georgia crisis. Although Admiral Harry Train was told by Anaya that 
this plan was in fact never executed, today it is known, according to 
British intelligence sources, that the Argentine Navy recognized there 
was an opportunity of establishing, clandestinely, the same type of 
presence in South Georgia as they had previously established with 
impunity in 1976, on Southern Thule, in the South Sandwich Islands. 
The plan, Operation Alpha, called for inserting Argentine commandos 
into DavidofFs party, and leaving them behind when Davidoffleft. 
The overall context is vital. Three months before the conflict, events 
in the longer term must be judged as running all Argentina’s way. The 
British defence review, the proposed withdrawal of the white ensign 
from the South Atlantic with the ice-patrol vessel HMS Endurance, a 
new Nationality Act which denied British citizenship to Falkland 
Islanders, the intended closing of the British Antarctic Survey, the only 
British presence on South Georgia; all these things suggested, as Costa 
Mendez put it, that ‘either Britain was losing interest ... or ... was 
compelled to leave the zone’. However, at the last round of joint talks to 
be held before the conflict in February 1982, Britain had offered no 
advance on sovereignty. Tensions increased. In March, when Davidoff 
arrived in South Georgia there were ambiguities over landing pro¬ 
cedures, and whether simple landing cards or passports were required. 
However, Davidoff had landed at Leith, on South Georgia, without 
passing go, as it were, by presenting himself for formalities at Grytviken. 
The Ministry of Defence in London sailed HMS Endurance with orders 
to arrest and remove the scrap dealers if they did not acknowledge


122 
ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
British authorities. This peremptory announcement was accompanied 
by what were seen as exaggerated responses in British newspapers. 
Admiral Anaya had reached the limits of toleration. Argentina had 
huffed and puffed down the years, now it would act. Anaya seized the 
pretext to fulfil his iife-long ambition’ of restoring the Falklands to 
Argentina. This interplay between Britain’s defence cuts and reaction to 
the scrap dealers’ affair was invested by Argentina with great impor¬ 
tance. In retrospect, it ensured that South Georgia became an Anglo- 
Argentine ‘Sarajevo’ in the Southern Ocean. Dr Nicanor Costa 
Mendez, George Brown’s interlocutor in 1967 (when Britain had first 
stated formally to Argentina its willingness to cede sovereignty under 
certain conditions), had been brought back by the military junta in 
December 1981 and was now, therefore, Argentina’s foreign minister for 
the second time. 
When we were squabbling around the Georgias, I made a proposition 
in my negotiations with Lord Carrington through the ambassador 
and through the charge d’affaires in London. I proposed that the 
Argentine workmen go to Grytviken to have their white cards 
stamped. 
Why didn’t they do so in the first place? 
Why didn’t they? Because there are many discussions about the need 
to have those white cards stamped. But anyhow, at that moment, that 
was our offer. The British reaction was through Governor Hunt,25 
who was the man behind this idea, to ask for passports with visas. 
This was unacceptable to Argentina and had been unacceptable for 
many, many years. 
Are you saying that initial British and British press reaction to the arrival of 
Senor Davidoffs famous scrap-dealing party, of forty or so, was taken by you to 
representfailure of the British Government defence policies announced in ig8i, 
and that you saw some retreatfrom those decisions and their significance? 
Yes. Or, having to adopt positions that were going to create indefinite 
deadlock, stalemate. 
Would it also be right to suggest that you, who had been foreign minister in the 
ig6os, saw all that happening again? 
This is correct. 
In other words, your experiences of the past came to influence your judgement 
strongly at a very important moment? 
This is correct. 
25 Governor of the Falkland Islands.


ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
I23 
Why did you notfollow the normal procedures of protest, as in the past? Why did 
you and the military leaders feel that you could no longer think this way over the 
Georgias incident? 
Because of many reasons. Because, in the past, protest had had no 
effect whatsoever. 
I don’t know why I should think that nothing must be done by the 
Argentine Government, because anything done by the Argentine 
Government would irritate the Falklands lobby, and that, therefore 
we should stay at home and forget all about the Islands, even very 
pacific movements such as landing workmen who were going to 
dismantle a very old whaling factory. 
But you strip that of its political significance, and I’m sure you don V mean to. If 
the British Antarctic Survey had been withdrawn, the Argentine scrap dealers 
would have been the only inhabitants on the Georgias; thus reaffirming, which 
was part of Argentina's policy, an Argentine presence throughout all the Islands, 
wherever possible. 
In the first place, no one was sure, not even the British authorities, 
that the British Antarctic Survey was going to be dismantled. Frankly, 
we could not ask an Argentine citizen not to go there because we had 
suspicions that this would cause a reaction in the British people, or 
the lobby. 
I would like to put this to you. You felt here in Buenos Aires, the Junta felt, that 
by increasing the level of threat to the United Kingdom, which included the 
military alternative of a touch and go landing on the Falklands to which you've 
referred, that would be the spur and justification the Conservative Government 
needed to negotiate with you? 
What the Junta thought was that, as things stood, deadlock was 
unavoidable and that, in the light of past history, deadlock would be 
very long. On the other hand, intervention by the United States or by 
the Security Council could avoid a deadlock and, if not reach agree¬ 
ment, then at least activate talks. The other thing was, if Argentina 
accepted the British position concerning the Davidoff men, that 
would erode Argentina’s position in the world, both legally and 
politically. The Government would lose credibility both domestically 
and internationally. 
While Lord Carrington’s gifts as a diplomatist included a widely 
acknowledged ability to charm the birds from the trees, in Argentine 
eyes it was his apparent immobilization over the Falklands issue which 
succeeded in scaring them into the air. Argentine frustration boiled 
over. By 1982 the sovereignty issue, twice brought to the negotiating


124 
ARGENTINE ATTITUDES 
table by Britain, had been twice effectively removed. Democracy, it is 
said, often changes its mind, because it seldom knows it, and so the 
charges of perfidy arise. What of Argentina, which was not a democracy? 
The former foreign minister, Dr Oscar Camilion, presented his own 
talks with Lord Carrington six months before the invasion, as ‘A most 
significant development in the Falklands negotiations, with the British 
agreeing for the first time that the present status of the islands cannot be 
maintained’.26 Looking back, Camilion says of Argentina that, ‘It had 
never really examined its mind over the Falklands.’ 
Something that I learnt during my diplomatic life is that you always 
need to negotiate, that you should never interrupt a negotiation, and 
you must know your minimum goals. Look, this problem of the 
Islands, the Malvinas, was in fact negotiated after the invasion with 
the mediation of General Haig. 
I think that the real, critical problem for Argentina was that its 
minimum goals were never well determined in Buenos Aires. For that 
reason the negotiations failed. In those negotiations, with Haig, that 
started after the invasion, that was very clear, and it was very tragic for 
us. 
The basis of any successful negotiation must always be that you must know your 
own position? 
Of course, of course. 
With what disastrous ingenuity, therefore, did Argentina choose the 
short cut which led to war. 
Having come as far as the brink of the conflict in the South Atlantic as 
seen by Argentina, it is time to return to Britain as it, in turn, set out on 
this collision course in 1981. 
26 Franks Report, para. 103.


6 
A General Micawberism 
In 1981, the year before the war, British policy over the Falklands was 
falling into the unhappy condition once described by Churchill as 
‘adamant for drift’. The House of Commons, in a furious all-party 
assault at the end of 1980, had rejected the proposal of the Foreign 
Office minister, Nicholas Ridley, to transfer sovereignty to Argentina 
and then lease the Islands back. Following almost seventeen years of 
negotiations with Argentina it became evident that Lord Carrington, the 
foreign secretary, no less than his predecessors, was hamstrung by ‘the 
paramount wishes of the Islanders’. 
The major defence review undertaken in 1981 set out Britain’s future as 
a European nation and a regional power. This highlighted the ambiguities 
inherent in the commitment to defend the Falklands. A consequence of 
these developments was that Britain continued to remain indifferent at a 
time when, for domestic reasons, the Argentine Junta needed an achieve¬ 
ment. In the summer of 1981, the Foreign Office officials were sufficiently 
alarmed to call ministers to a special meeting at Carlton Gardens. It was 
agreed that only leaseback stood any chance of solving the dispute. 
In the autumn, some six months before the invasion, the diplomats 
pressed Lord Carrington to advance the priority of the Falklands issue 
by taking it to ‘OD’, the Defence Committee of the Cabinet, for a firm 
decision in favour of leaseback. Lord Carrington, one of the most 
popular and successful foreign secretaries for many years, had nodded, 
but said it was not possible. This meant that throughout the year before 
the war, government policy toward the Falklands was never discussed 
formally outside the Foreign Office. As events transpired, these were 
months which the locusts ate. 
Of the three courses open to him, Lord Carrington decided to go on 
playing for time, neither breaking off negotiations nor promoting lease¬ 
back. This drew a protest in a dispatch to the Foreign Office from the 
British ambassador to Argentina, Sir Anthony Williams.

