
===== PDFPAGE 1 =====
REPORTS OF INTERNATIONAL
ARBITRAL AWARDS
RECUEIL DES SENTENCES
ARBITRALES
Island of Palmas case (Netherlands, USA)
4 April 1928
II pp. 829-871
VOLUME
NATIONS UNIES - UNITED NATIONS
Copyright (c) 2006

===== PDFPAGE 2 =====
XX.
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE1.
PARTIES: Netherlands, U.S.A.
SPECIAL AGREEMENT: January 23, 1925.
ARBITRATOR: Max Huber (Switzerland).
AWARD: The Hague, April, 1928.
Territorial sovereignty.—Contiguity and title to territory.—Continuous
and peaceful display of sovereignty.—The "intertemporal" law.—Rules
of evidence in international proceedings.—Maps as evidence.—Inchoate
title.—Passivity in relation to occupation.—Dutch East India Company
as subject of international law.—Treaties with native princes.—Subsequent
practice as an element of interpretation.
1 For bibliography, index and tables, see Volume III.

===== PDFPAGE 3 =====

===== PDFPAGE 4 =====
831
Special Agreement.
[See beginning of Award below.]
AWARD OF THE TRIBUNAL.
Award of the tribunal of arbitration tendered in conformity with the special agreement
concluded an January 23, 1925, between the United States of America and the
Netherlands relating to the arbitratiov. of differences respecting sovereignty over
the Island ofPalmas [or Miangas).—The Hague. April 4, 1928.
An agreement relating to the arbitration of differences respecting sover-
eignty over the Island of Palmas (or Miangas) was signed by the United
States oi" America and the Netherlands on January 23rd, 1925. The text of
the agreement runs as follows :
The United States of America and Her Majesty the Queen of the
Netherlands,
Desiring to terminate in accordance with the principles of Inter-
national Law and any applicable treaty provisions the differences which
have arisen and now subsist between them with respect to the sover-
eignty over the Island of Palmas (or Miangas) situated approximately
fifty miles south-east from Cape San Augustin, Island of Mindanao, at
about five degrees and thirty-five minutes (5° 35') north latitude, one
hundred and twenty-six degrees and thirty-six minutes (126° 36') longi-
tude east from Greenwich;
Considering that these differences belong to those which, pursuant
to Article I of the Arbitration Convention concluded by the two high
contracting parties on May 2, 1908, and renewed by agreements, dated
May 9, 1914, March 8, 1919, and February 13, 1924, respectively,
might well be submitted to arbitration,
Have appointed as their respective plenipotentiaries for the purpose
of concluding the following special agreement:
The President of the United States of America : Charles Evans
Hughes, Secretary of State of the United States of America, and
Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands: Jonkheer Dr. A. C. D.
de Graeff, Her Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Pleni-
potentiary at Washington,
Who, after exhibiting to eacli other their respective full powers,
which were found to be in due and proper form, have agreed upon the
following articles:
Article I.
The United States of America and Her Majesty the Queen of the
Netherlands hereby agree to refer the decision of the above-mentioned

===== PDFPAGE 5 =====
832 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.)
differences to the Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague.
The arbitral tribunal shall consist of one arbitrator.
The sole duty of the Arbitrator shall be to determine whether the
Island of Palmas (or Miangas) in its entirety forms a part of territory
belonging to the United States of America or of Netherlands territory.
The two Governments shall designate the Arbitrator from the mem-
bers of the Permanent Court of Arbitration. 
If they shall be unable
to agree on such designation, they shall unite in requesting the President
of the Swiss Confederation to designate the Arbitrator.
Article II.
Within six months after the exchange of ratifications of this special
agreement, each Government shall present to the other party two
printed copies of a memorandum containing a statement of its conten-
tions and the documents in support thereof. It shall be sufficient for
this purpose if the copies aforesaid are delivered by the Government
of the United States at the Netherlands Legation at Washington and
by the Netherlands Government at the American Legation at The
Hague, for transmission. As soon thereafter as possible and within
thirty days, each party shall transmit two printed copies of its memo-
randum to the International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbi-
tration for delivery to the Arbitrator.
Within six months after the expiration of the period above fixed for
the delivery of the memoranda to the parties, each party may, if it is
deemed advisable, transmit to the other two printed copies of a counter-
memorandum and any documents in support thereof in answer to the
memorandum of the other party. The copies of the counter-memo-
randum shall be delivered to the parties, and within thirty days there-
after to the Arbitrator, in the manner provided for in the foregoing
paragraph respecting the delivery of memoranda.
At the instance of one or both of the parties, the Arbitrator shall have
authority, after hearing both parties and for good cause shown, to
extend the above-mentioned periods.
Article III.
After the exchange of the counter-memoranda, the case shall be
deemed closed unless the Arbitrator applies to either or both of the
parties for further written explanations.
In case the Arbitrator makes such a request on either party, he shall
do so through the International Bureau of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration which shall communicate a copy of his request to the other
party. The party addressed shall be allowed for reply three months
from the date of the receipt of the Arbitrator's request, which date shall
be at once communicated to the other party and to the International
Bureau. Such reply shall be communicated to the other party and
within thirty days thereafter to the Arbitrator in the manner provided
for above for the delivery of memoranda, and the opposite party may if
it is deemed advisable, have a further period of three months to make
rejoinder thereto, which shall be communicated in like manner.
The Arbitrator shall notify both parties through the International
Bureau of the date upon which, in accordance with the foregoing pro-

===== PDFPAGE 6 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS C\SE (NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.) 
833
visions, the case is closed, so far as the presentation of memoranda and
evidence by either party is concerned.
Article IV.
The parties shall be at liberty to use. in the course of arbitration, the
English or Netherlands language or the native language of the Arbi-
trator. 
If either party uses the English or Netherlands language, a
translation into the native language of the Arbitrator shall be furnished
if desired by him.
The Arbitrator shall be at liberty to use his native language or the
English or Netherlands language in the course of the arbitration and
the award and opinion accompanying it may be in any one of those
languages.
Article V.
The Arbitrator shall decide any questions of procedure which may
arise during the course of the arbitration.
Article VI.
Immediately after the exchange of ratifications of this special agree-
ment each party shall place in (he hands of the Arbitrator the sum of
one hundred pounds sterling by way of advance of costs.
Article VII.
The Arbitrator shall, within three months after the date upon which
he declares the case closed for the presentation of memoranda and
evidence, render his award in writing and deposit three signed copies
thereof with the International Bureau at The Hague, one copy to be
retained by the Bureau and one to be transmitted to each party, as
soon as this may be done.
The award shall be accompanied by a statement of the grounds upon
which it is based.
The Arbitrator shall fix the amount of the costs of procedure in his
award. Each party shall defray its own expenses and half of said costs
of procedure and of the honorarium of the Arbitrator.
Article VIII.
The parties undertake to accept the award rendered by the Arbitrator
within the limitations of this special agreement, as final and con-
clusive and without appeal.
All disputes connected with the interpretation and execution of the
award shall be submitted to the decision of the Arbitrator.
Article IX.
This special agreement shall be ratified in accordance with the
constitutional forms of the contracting parties and shall take effect
immediately upon the exchange of ratifications, which shall take place
as soon as possible at Washington.
53

===== PDFPAGE 7 =====
834 
ISLAND OF PALM.AS CASE (NETHERLANDS/u.S.A.)
In witness whereof the respective plenipotentiaries have signed this
special agreement and have hereunto affixed their seals.
Done in duplicate in the City of Washington in the English and
Netherlands languages this 23rl\ day of January, 1925.
(L. S.) CHARLES EVANS HUGHES.
(L. S.) DE GRAEFF.
I.
The ratifications of the above agreement (hereafter called the Special Agree-
ment) were exchanged at Washington on April 1st, 1925. By letters
dated September 29lh, 1925, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Her Majesty
the Queen of the Netherlands and the Minister of the United States of
America at The Hague asked the undersigned, Max Huber, of Zurich
(Switzerland), member of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, whether he
would be disposed to accept the mandate to act as sole arbitrator under the
Special Agreement of January 23rd, 1925. The undersigned informed the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands and the Minister of the United
States of America at The Hague that he was willing to accept the task.
On October 16th a n (j 23rd, 1925, the International Bureau of the Perma-
nent Court of Arbitration transmitted to the Arbitrator the Memoranda of
the United States of America 1 and the Netherlands 2 with the documents in
support thereof. On April 23rd a nd 24th, 1926, the Counter-Memoranda of
the Netherlands 3 and the United States of America 4 with documents in
support thereof were transmitted to the Arbitrator through the International
Bureau.
Availing himself of the authority given him under Article III of the Spe-
cial Agreement, the Arbitrator transmitted through the intermediary of the
International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration to each party a
list of points upon which he was desirous to obtain further written Explana-
tions. This request was obtained by the Netherlands on December 24th,
1926, and by the United States of America on January 6**, 1927. The Arbi-
trator received through the intermediary of the International Bureau the
Explanations of the Netherlands5, with documents in support thereof, on
March 24fii. 1927, and those of the United States of America " on April 22nd,
1927.
On May 19tii, 1927, the Arbitrator received through the International
Bureau a memorandum of the American Government, dated May 2nd, 1927.
1 Memorandum of the United States, with appendix, 219 pages and 12 maps
in folder.
2 Memorandum of the Netherlands, with appendices, 83 pages, 4 maps and
sketches and reproduction of photos in folder, British Admiralty Chart 2575,
with inscriptions, six copies of diplomatic correspondence between .the United
States Department of State and the Netherlands Legation in Washington.
3 Counter-Memorandum of the Netherlands, with appendices, 95 pages and
1 map.
1 Counter-Memorandum of the United States, with appendix, 121 pages,
3 photos and 3 maps.
5 Explanations of the Netherlands, 146 pages and XX annexes (25 maps and
sketches, reproduction of Dampiers' Journal, copies of entries of log-books and
biographical notice concerning the late Dr. Adriani).
6 Explanations of the United States, with appendix, 68 pages.

===== PDFPAGE 8 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.) 
835
The United States expressed the desire to make a Rejoinder as provided for
in Article III of the Special Agreement "unless the Arbitrator prefers not to
receive it, in which case none will be filed, unless one is filed by the Nether-
lands Government". At the same rime the United States Government made
an application for an extension of three months beyond the period mentioned
in Article III for the filing of a Rejoinder, and invoked in support of this ap-
plication the fact that the Explanations of the Netherlands were considerably
more voluminous than the Memorandum, and contained a large mass of
untranslated Dutch documents, and more than 25 maps.
The Netherlands Government had already on May 9th, 1927, declared that
they renounced the right to submit a Rejoinder, making however the express
reservation that they maintained the points of view which the American
Explanations contested.
The Arbitrator, on the analogy of the rule laid down in the last paragraph
of Article II, invited the Netherlands Government by a letter dated May 13th,
1927, and addressed to the International Bureau, to state their point of view
in regard to the American application.
The Netherlands Government having declared that they had no objection
to the extension of the time-limit in conformity with the American applica-
tion, the Arbitrator, in a letter to the International Bureau dated May 23rd,
1927, informed the Parties that the extension of three months beyond the
period provided for in Article III lor the filing of a Rejoinder was granted.
On October 21 a*, 1927, the Rejoinder of the United States ' was transmitted
by the International Bureau to the Arbitrator.
No observation by either Party was made during the proceedings in re-
gard to the fact that one of the documents provided for in the Agreement of
January 23i<i, 1925, was not filed within the time-limits fixed in the said
Agreement.
On March 3rd, 1928, the Arbitrator informed the Parties through the
International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, that, in con-
formity with the last paragraph of Article III, the case was closed.
On this fourth day of April 1928, i.e. within the period fixed by Article VII,
the three copies of the award are deposited with the International Bureau of
the Permanent Court of Arbitration, at The Hague.
In conformity with the second paragraph of Article IV of the Special
Agreement, the Arbitrator selected the English language. Having regard to
the fact that geographical names are differently spelt in different documents
and on different maps, the Arbitrator gives geographical names as shown on
the British Admiralty Chart 2575, as being the most modern of the large
scale maps laid before him. Other names and, if necessary, their variations,
are given in bracket or parenthesis.
In accordance with Article VIII, paragraph 3, the costs of procedure are
fixed at £140.
II.
The subject oj the dispute is the sovereignty over the Island of Palmas (or
Miangas). The Island in question is indicated with precision in the pre-
amble to the Special Agreement, its latitude and longitude being specified.
The fact that in the diplomatic correspondence prior to the conclusion of the
Special Agreement, and in the documents of the arbitration proceedings, the
United States refer to the "Island of Palmas" and the Netherlands to the
Rejoinder of the United States, with appendix, 126 pages and 8 maps.

===== PDFPAGE 9 =====
836 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.)
"Island of Miangas", does not therefore concern the identity of the subject
of the dispute. Such difference concerns only the question whether certain
assertions made by the Netherlands Government really relate to the island
described in the Special Agreement or another island or group of islands
which might be designated by the name of Miangas or a similar name.
It results from the evidence produced by either side that Palmas (or
Miangas) is a single, isolated island, not one of several islands clustered
together. It lies about halfway between Cape San Augustin (Mindanao,
Philippine Islands) and the most northerly island of the Nanusa (Nanoesa)
group (Netherlands East Indies).
The origin of the dispute is to be found in the visit paid to the Island of
Palmas (or Miangas) on January 21st, 1906, by General Leonard Wood, who
was then Governor of the Province of Moro. It is true that according to
information contained in the Counter-Memorandum of the United States
the same General Wood had already visited the island "about the year 1903",
but as this previous visit appears to have had no results, and it seems even
doubtful whether it took place, that of January 2 l3t, 1906, is to be regarded as
the first entry into contact by the American authorities with the island.
The report of General Wood to the Military Secretary, United States Army,
dated January 26'h, 1906, and the certificate delivered on January 21st by
First Lieutenant Gordon Johnston to the native interrogated by the con-
troller of the Sangi (Sanghi) and Talauer (Talaut) Islands clearly show that
the visit of January 218t relates to the island in dispute.
This visit led to the statement that the Island of Palmas (or Miangas),
undoubtedly included in the "archipelago known as the Philippine Islands",
as delimited by Article III of the Treaty of Peace between the United States
and Spain, dated December 10lh, 1898 (hereinafter also called "Treaty of
Paris"), and ceded in virtue of the said article to the United States, was con-
sidered by the Netherlands as forming part of the territory of their posses-
sions in the East Indies. There followed a diplomatic correspondence,
beginning on March 31*1, 1906, and leading up to the conclusion of the
Special Agreement of January 23™1, 1925.
Before beginning to consider the arguments of the Parties, we may at the
outset take as established certain facts which, according to the pleadings, are
not contested.
1. The Treaty of Peace of December 10*'', 1898, and the Special Agree-
ment of January 23"', 1925, are the only international instruments laid
before the Arbitrator which refer precisely, that is, by mathematical location
or by express and unequivocal mention, to the island in dispute, or include it
in or exclude it from a zone delimited by a geographical frontier-line. 
The
scope of the international treaties which relate to the "Philippines" and of
conventions entered into with native Princes will be considered in connection
with the arguments of the Party relying on a particular act.
2. Before 1906 no dispute had arisen between the United States or Spain,
on the one hand, and the Netherlands, on the other, in regard specifically to
the Island of Palmas (or Miangas), on the ground that these Powers put
forward conflicting claims to sovereignty over the said island.

===== PDFPAGE 10 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.) 
837
3. 
The two Parties claim the island in question as a territoiy attached for
a very long period to territories relatively close at hand which are incontest-
ably under the sovereignty of the one or the other of them.
4. 
It results from the terms of the Special Agreement (Article I) that the
Parties adopt the view that for the purposes of the present arbitration the
island in question can belong only to one or the other of them. Rights of
third Powers only come into account in so far as the rights of the Parties to
the dispute may be derived from them.
The dispute having been submitted to arbitration by Special Agreement,
each Party is called upon to establish the arguments on which it relies in
support of its claim to sovereignty over the object in dispute. As regards the
order in which the Parties' arguments should be considered, it appears right to
examine first the title put forward by the United States, arising out of a
treaty and itself derived, according to the American arguments, from an
original title which would date back to a period prior to the birth of the title
put forward by the Netherlands; in ihe second place, the arguments invoked
by the Netherlands in favour of their title to sovereignty will be considered;
finally the result of the examination of the titles alleged by the two Parties
must be judged in the light of the mandate conferred on the Arbitrator by
Article I, paragraph 2, of the Special Agreement.
In the absence of an international instrument recognized by both Parties
and explicitly determining the legal position of the Island of Palmas (or
Miangas), the arguments of the Parties may in a general way be summed up as
follows :
The United States, as successor to Ihe rights of Spain over the Philippines,
bases ils title in the first place on discovery. The existence of sovereignty
thus acquired is, in the American view, confirmed not merely by the most
reliable cartographers and authors, but also by treaty, in particular by the
Treaty of Miinster, of 1648, to which Spain and the Netherlands are them-
selves Contracting Parlies. As, according to the same argument, nothing
has occurred of a nature, in international law, to cause the acquired title to
disappear, this latter title was intact at the moment when, by the Treaty of
December lOtii, 1898, Spain ceded the Philippines to the United States. In
these circumstances, it is, in the American view, unnecessary to establish
facts showing the actual display of sovereignty precisely over the Island
of Palmas (or Miangas). The United States Government finally maintains
that Palmas (or Miangas) forms a geographical part of the Philippine group
;ind in virtue of the principle of contiguity belongs to the Power having the
sovereignty over the Philippines.
According to the Netherlands Government, on the other hand, the fact of
discovery by Spain is not proved, nor yet any other form of acquisition, and
even if Spain had at any moment had a title, such title had been lost. The
principle of contiguity is contested.
The Netherlands Government's main argument endeavours to show that
the Netherlands, represented for this purpose in the first period of colonisa-
tion by the East India Company, have possessed and exercised rights of
sovereignty from 1677, or probably from a date prior even to 1648, to the
present day. This sovereignty arose out of conventions entered into with

===== PDFPAGE 11 =====
838 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.)
native princes of the Island of Sangi (the main island of the Talautse (Sangi)
Isles), establishing the suzerainty of the Netherlands over the territories of
these princes, including Palmas (or Miangas). The state of affairs thus set
up is claimed to be validated by international treaties.
The facts alleged in support of the Netherlands arguments are, in the
United States Government's view, not proved, and, even if they were
proved, they would not create a title of sovereignty, or would not concern
the Island of Palmas.
Before considering the Parties' arguments, two points of a general charac-
ter are to be dealt with, one relating to the substantive law to be applied,
namely the rules on territorial sovereignty which underly the present case,
and the other relating to the rules of procedure, namely the conditions under
which the Parties may, under the Special Agreement, substantiate their
claims.
*
In the first place the Arbitrator deems it necessary to make some general
remarks on sovereignty in its relation to territory.
The Arbitrator will as far as possible keep to the terminology employed in
the Special Agreement. The preamble refers to "sovereignty over the
Island of Palmas (or Miangas)", and under Article I, paragraph 2, the Arbi-
trator's task is to "determine whether the Island of Palmas (or Miangas) in
its entirety forms a part of Netherlands territory or of territory belonging to
the United States of America". It appears to follow that sovereignty in
relation to a portion of the surface of the globe is the legal condition necessary
for the inclusion of such portion in the territory of any particular State.
Sovereignty in relation to territory is in the present award called "territorial
sovereignty".
Sovereignty in the relations between States signifies independence. Inde-
pendence in regard to a portion of the globe is the right to exercise therein,
to the exclusion of any other State, the functions of a State. The develop-
ment of the national organisation of States during the last few centuries
and, as a corollary, the development of international law, have established
this principle of the exclusive competence of the State in regard to its own
territory in such a way as to make it the point of departure in settling most
questions that concern international relations. The special cases of the
composite State, of collective sovereignty, etc., do not fall to be considered
here and do not, for that matter, throw any doubt upon the principle which
has just been enunciated. Under this reservation it may be stated that
territorial sovereignty belongs always to one, or in exceptional circumstances
to several States, to the exclusion of all others. The fact that the functions
of a State can be performed by any State within a given zone is. on the other
hand, precisely the characteristic feature of the legal situation pertaining in
those parts of the globe which, like the high seas or lands without a master,
cannot or do not yet form the territory of a State.
Territorial sovereignty is, in general, a situation recognized and delimited
in space, either by so-called natural frontiers as recognised by international
law or by outward signs of delimitation that are undisputed, or else by legal
engagements entered into between interested neighbours, such as frontier
conventions, or by acts of recognition of States within fixed boundaries.
If a dispute arises as to the sovereignty over a portion of territory, it is custom-

===== PDFPAGE 12 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.) 
839
ary to examine which of the States claiming sovereignty possesses a title—
cession conquest, occupation, etc.—superior to that which the other State
might possibly bring forward against it. However, if the contestation is
based on the fact that the other Party has actually displayed sovereignty, it
cannot be sufficient to establish the title by which territorial sovereignty was
validly acquired at a certain moment; it must also be shown that the terri-
torial sovereignty has continued to exist and did exist at the moment which
for the decision of the dispute must be considered as critical. This demon-
stration consists in the actual display of State activities, such as belongs only
to the territorial sovereign.
Titles of acquisition of territorial sovereignty in present-day international
law are either based on an act of effeclive apprehension, such as occupation or
conquest, or, like cession, presuppose that the ceding and the cessionary
Powers or at least one of them, have ihe faculty of effectively disposing of the
ceded territory. In the same way natural accretion can only be conceived of
as an accretion to a portion of territory where there exists an actual sover-
eignty capable of extending to a spot which falls within its sphere of activity.
It seems therefore natural that an element which is essential for the constitu-
tion of sovereignty should not be lacking in its continuation. So true is this,
that practice, as well as doctrine, recognizes—though under different legal
formulae and with certain differences as to the conditions required—that the
continuous and peaceful display of territorial sovereignty (peaceful in rela-
tion to other States) is as good as a title. The growing insistence with which
international law, ever since the middle of the 18th century, has demanded
that the occupation shall be effective would be inconceivable, if effectiveness
were required only for the act of acquisition and not equally for the main-
tenance of the right. If the effectiveness has above all been insisted on in
regard to occupation, this is because the question rarely arises in connection
with territories in which there is already an established order of things.
Just as before the rise of international law, boundaries of lands were neces-
sarily determined by the fact that the power of a State was exercised with-
in them, so too, under the reign of international law., the fact of peaceful and
continuous display is still one of the most important considerations in
establishing boundaries between States.
Territorial sovereignty, as has already been said, involves the exclusive
right to display the activities of a State. This right has as corollary a duty:
the obligation to protect within the territory the rights of other States, in
particular their right to integrity and inviolability in peace and in war,
together with the rights which each State may claim for its nationals in
foreign territory. Without manifesting its territorial sovereignty in a manner
corresponding to circumstances, the State cannot fulfil this duty. Terri-
torial sovereignty cannot limit itself to its negative side, i.e. to excluding the
activities of other States; for it serves to divide between nations the space
upon which human activities are employed, in order to assure them at all
points the minimum of protection of which international law is the guardian.
Although municipal law, thanks to its complete judicial system, is able to
recognize abstract rights of property as existing apart from any material
display of them, it has none the less limited their effect by the principles of
prescription and the protection of possession. International law, the struc-
ture of which is not based on any super-State organisation, cannot be pre-
sumed to reduce a right such as territorial sovereignty, with which almost all
international relations are bound up, to the category of an abstract right,
without concrete manifestations.

===== PDFPAGE 13 =====
840 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE 
(NETHERLANDSI'U.S.A.)
The principle that continuous and peaceful display of the functions of
State within a given region is a constituent element of territorial sovereignty
is not only based on the conditions of the formation of independent States
and their boundaries (as shown by the experience of political history) as well
as on an international jurisprudence and doctrine widely accepted; this prin-
ciple has further been recognized in more than one federal State, where a
jurisdiction is established in order to apply, as need arises, rules of interna-
tional law to the interstate relations of the States members. This is the
more significant, in that it might well be conceived that in a federal State
possessing a complete judicial system for interstate matters—far more than
in the domain of international relations properly so-called—there should be
applied to territorial questions the principle that, failing any specific pro-
vision of law to the contrary, a. jus in re once lawfully acquired shall prevail
over de facto possession however well established.
It may suffice to quote among several non dissimilar decisions of the Su-
preme Court of the United States of America that in the case of the State of
Indiana v. State of Kentucky (136 U.S. 479) 1890, where the precedent of
the case of Rhode Island v. Massachusetts (4 How. 591, 639) is supported by
quotations from Vattel and Wheaton, who both admit prescription founded
on length of time as a valid and incontestable title.
Manifestations of territorial sovereignty assume, it is true, different
forms, according to conditions of time and place. Although continuous in
principle, sovereignty cannot be exercised in fact at every moment on every
point of a territory. The intermittence and discontinuity compatible with
the maintenance of the right necessarily differ according as inhabited or unin-
habited regions are involved, or regions enclosed within territories in which
sovereignty is incontestably displayed or again regions accessible from, for
instance, the high seas. It is true that neighbouring States may by conven-
tion fix limits to their own sovereignty, even in regions such as the interior
of scarcely explored continents where such sovereignty is scarcely mani-
fested, and in this way each may prevent the other from any penetration of
its territory. The delimitation of Hinterland may also be mentioned in this
connection.
If, however, no conventional line of sufficient topographical precision
exists or if there are gaps in the frontiers otherwise established, or if a con-
ventional line leaves room for doubt, or if, as e.g. in the case of an island
situated in the high seas, the question arises whether a title is valid erga
omnes, the actual continuous and peaceful display of State functions is in
case of dispute the sound and natural critérium of territorial sovereignty.
The United States in their Counter-Memorandum and their Rejoinder
maintain the view that statements without evidence to support them cannot
be taken into consideration in an international arbitration, and that evidence
is not only to be referred to, but is to be laid before the tribunal. The United
States further hold that, since the Memorandum is the only document neces-
sarily to be filed by the Parties under the Special Agreement, evidence in
support of the statements therein made should have been filed at the same
time. The Netherlands Government, particularly in the Explanations fur-
nished at the request of the Arbitrator, maintains that no formal rules of
evidence exist in international arbitrations and that no rule limiting the free-
dom of the tribunal in forming its conclusions has been established by the
Special Agreement of January 23rd, 1925. They hold further that state-

===== PDFPAGE 14 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/'U.S.A .) 
841
ments made by a government in regard to its own acts are evidence in them-
selves and have no need of supplementary corroboration.
Since a divergence of view between the Parties as to the necessity and
admissibility of evidence is a question of procedure, it is for the Arbitrator to
decide it under Article V of the Special Agreement.
The provisions of Article II of (he Special Agreement to the effect that
documents in support of the Parties' arguments are to be annexed to the
Memoranda and Counter-Memoranda, refers rather to the time and place
at which each Party should inform the other of the evidence it is producing,
but does not establish a necessary connection between any argument and a
document or other piece or evidence corresponding therewith. However
desirable it may be that evidence should be produced as complete and at as
early a stage as possible, it would seem to be contrary to the broad principles
applied in international arbitrations to exclude a limine, except under the
explicit terms of a conventional rule, every allegation made by a Party as
irrelevant, if it is not supported by evidence, and to exclude evidence relating
to such allegations from being produced at a later stage of the procedure.
The provisions of the Hague Convention of 1907 for the peaceful settle-
ment of international disputes are, under Article 51, to be applied, as the
case may be, as subsidiary law in proceedings falling within the scope of that
convention, or should serve at least to construe such arbitral agreements.
Now, Articles 67, 68 and 69 of this convention admit the production of docu-
ments apart from that provided for in Article 63 in connection with the filing
of cases, counter-cases and replies, with the consent, or at the request of the
tribunal. This liberty of accepting and collecting evidence guarantees to
the tribunal the possibility of basing its decisions on the whole of the facts
which are relevant in its opinion.
The authorization given to the Arbitrator by Article III of the Special
Agreement to apply to the Parties for further written Explanations would be
extraordinary limited if such explanations could not extend to any allega-
tions already made and could not consist of evidence which included docu-
ments and maps. The limitation to written explanations excluded oral pro-
cedure; but it is not to be construed as excluding documentary evidence of
any kind. It is for the Arbitrator to decide both whether allegations do or—
as being within the knowledge of the tribunal—do not need evidence in
support and whether the evidence produced is sufficient or not; and finally
whether points left aside by the Parties ought to be elucidated. This liberty
is essential to him, for he must be able to satisfy himself on those points
which are necessary to the legal construction upon which he feels bound to
base his judgment. He must consider the totality of the allegations and
evidence laid before him by the Parties, either motu proprio or at his request
and decide what allegations are to be considered as sufficiently substantiated.
Failing express provision, an arbitral tribunal must have entire freedom to
estimate the value of assertions made by the Parties. For the same reason,
it is entirely free to appreciate the value of assertions made during proceed-
ings at law by a government in regard to its own acts. Such assertions are
not properly speaking legal instruments, as would be declarations creating
rights; they are statements concerning historical facts. The value and the
weight of any assertion can only be estimated in the light of all the evidence
and all the assertions made on either side, and of facts which are notorious
for the tribunal.
For the reasons stated above the Arbitrator is unable to construe the Spe-
cial Agreement of January 23"', 1925. as excluding the subsidiary application

===== PDFPAGE 15 =====
842 
ISLAND OF FALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.J
of the above-mentioned articles of the Hague Convention or the taking into
consideration of allegations not supported by evidence filed at the same time.
No documents which are not on record have been relied upon, with the excep-
tion of the Treaty of Utrecht—invoked however in the Netherlands Counter-
Memorandum—the text of which is of public notoriety and accessible to the
Parties, and no allegation not supported by evidence is taken as foundation
for the award. The possibility to make Rejoinder to the Explanations fur-
nished at the request of the Arbitrator on points contained in the Memo-
randa and Counter-Memoranda and the extension of the time-limits for
filing a Rejoinder has put both Parties in a position to state—under fair
conditions—their point of view in regard to that evidence which came forth
only at a subsequent stage of the proceedings.
III.
The title alleged by the United States of America as constituting the im-
mediate foundation of its claim is that of cession, brought about by the
Treaty of Paris, which cession transferred all rights of sovereignty which
Spain may have possessed in the region indicated in Article III of the said
Treaty and therefore also those concerning the Island of Palmas (or Mian-
gas).
It is evident that Spain could not transfer more rights than she herself
possessed. This principle of law is expressly recognized in a letter dated
April 7th, 1900, from the Secretary of State of the United States to the
Spanish Minister at Washington concerning a divergence of opinion which
arose about the question whether two islands claimed by Spain as Spanish
territory and lying just outside the limits traced by the Treaty of Paris were
to be considered as included in, or excluded from the cession. This letter,
reproduced in the Explanations of the United States Government, contains
the following passage:
The metes and bounds defined in the treaty were not understood by
either party to limit or extend Spain's right of cession. Were any
island within those described bounds ascertained to belong in fact to
Japan. China, Great Britain or Holland, the United States could
derive no valid title from its ostensible inclusion in the Spanish cession.
The compact upon which the United States negotiators insisted was that
all Spanish title to the archipelago known as the Philippine Islands
should pass to the United States—no less or more than Spain's actual
holdings therein, but all. This Government must consequently hold
that the only competent and equitable test of fact by which the title to
a disputed cession in that quarter may be determined is simply this :
''Was it Spain's to give? If valid title belonged to Spain, it passed;
if Spain had no valid title, she could convey none."
Whilst there existed a divergence of views as to the extension of the ces-
sion to certain Spanish islands outside the treaty limits, it would seem that
the cessionary Power never envisaged that the cession, in spite of the sweep-
ing terms of Article III, should comprise territories on which Spain had not
a valid title, though falling within the limits traced by the Treaty. 
It is
evident that whatever may be the right construction of a treaty, it cannot
be interpreted as disposing of the rights of independent third Powers.
One observation, however, is to be made. Article III of the Treaty of Paris,
which is drafted differently from the preceding Article concerning Porto

===== PDFPAGE 16 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.) 
843
Rico, is so worded that it seems :is though the Philippine Archipelago,
within the limits fixed by thai Article, was at the moment of cession under
Spanish sovereignty. As already stated the Island of Palmas lies within
the lines traced by the Treaty. Article III may therefore'be considered
as an affirmation of sovereignty on the part of Spain as regards the Island of
Palmas (orMiangas), and this right or claim of right would have been ceded
to the United States, though the negotiations of 1898, as far as they are on
the record of the present case, do not disclose that the situation of Palmas
had been specifically examined.
It is recognized that the United States communicated, on February 3rtl,
1899, the Treaty of Paris to the Netherlands, and that no reservations were
made by the latter in respect to the delimitation of the Philippines in Article
III. The question whether the silence of a third Power, in regard to a treaty
notified to it. can exercise any influence on the rights of this Power, or on
those of the Powers signatories of i.he treaty, is a question the answer to
which may depend on the nature of such rights. Whilst it is conceivable
that a conventional delimitation duly notified to third Powers and left with-
out contestation on their part may have some bearing on an inchoate title
not supported by any actual display of sovereignty, it would be entirely
contrary to the principles laid down above as to territorial sovereignty to
suppose that such sovereignty could be affected by the mere silence of the
territorial sovereign as regards a treaty which has been notified to him and
which seems to dispose of a part of his territory.
The essential point is therefore whether the Island of Palmas (or Miangas)
at the moment of the conclusion and coming into force of the Treaty of Paris
formed a part of the Spanish or Netherlands territory. The United States
•declares that Palmas (or Miangas) was Spanish territory and denies the exist-
ence of Dutch sovereignty; the Netherlands maintain the existence of their
sovereignty and deny that of Spain. Only if the examination of the argu-
ments of both Parties should lead to the conclusion that the Island of Palmas
(or Miangas) was at the critical moment neither Spanish nor Netherlands
territory, would the question arise whether—and, if so, how—the conclusion
of the Treaty of Paris and its notification to the Netherlands might have
interfered with the rights which the Netherlands or the United States of
America may claim over the island in dispute,
As pointed out above, the United States bases its claim, as successor of
Spain, in the first place on discovery. In this connection a distinction must
be made between the discovery of the Island of Palmas (orMiangas) as such,
or as a part of the Philippines, which, beyond doubt, were discovered and
even occupied and colonised by the Spaniards. This latter point, however,
will be considered with the argument relating to contiguity; the problem of
discovery is considered only in relation to the island itself which forms the
subject of the dispute.
The documents supplied to the Arbitrator with regard to the discovery of
the island in question consist in the first place of a communication made by
the Spanish Government to the United States Government as to researches
in the archives concerning expeditions and discoveries in the Moluccas, the
"Talaos" Islands, the Palaos Islands and theMarianes. The United States
Government, in its Rejoinder, however states that it does not specifically
rely on the papers mentioned in the Spanish note.

===== PDFPAGE 17 =====
844 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.)
It is probable that the island seen when the Palaos Islands were discov-
ered, and reported as situated at latitude 5° 48' North, to the East of Saran-
gani and Cape San Augustin, was identical with the Island of Palmas (or
Miangas). Ttie Island "Meanguis" mentioned by the Spanish Government
and presumed by them to be identical with the Talaos—probably Talautse
or Talauer Islands—seems in reality to be an island lying more to the south,
to which, perhaps by error, the name of another island has been transferred
or which may be identified with the island Tangulandang (Tangulanda or
Tahoelandang) just south of Siau (Siaoe), the latter island being probably
identical with "Suar" mentioned in the same report as lying close by. Tang-
ulandang is almost the southernmost of the islands situated between Celebes
and Mindanao, whilst Palmas (or Miangas) is the northernmost. On Tang-
ulandang there is a place called Minangan, the only name, as it would seem,
to be found on maps of the region in question which is closely similar to
Miangas and the different variations of this word. The name of "Man-
anga" appears as that of a place on "'Tagulanda" in official documents of
1678. 1 779, 1896 and 1905, but is never applied to the island itself; it is there-
fore not probable that there exists a confusion between Palmas (Miangas)
and Minangan (Manangan) in spite of the fact that both islands belonged to
Tabukan. However there may exist some connection between Minangan
and the island "Meanguis", reported by the Spanish navigators.
The above-mentioned communication of the Spanish Government does not
give any details as to the date of the expedition, the navigators or the cir-
cumstances in which the observations were made; it is not supported by
extracts from the original reports on which it is based, nor accompanied
by reproductions of the maps therein mentioned.
In its Rejoinder the United States Government gives quotations (transla-
tions) from a report of the voyages of Garcia de Loaisa which point to the
fact that the Spanish explorer saw the Island of Palmas (Miangas) in Octo-
ber 1526.
The fact that an island marked as "I (Ilha) de (or das) Palmeiras", or by
similar names (Polanas, Palmas), appears on maps at any rate as early as
1595 (or 1596) (the date of the earliest map filed in the dossier), approxi-
mately on the site of the Island of Palmas (or Miangas), shows that that
island was known and therefore already discovered in the 16th century.
According to the Netherlands memorandum, the same indications are found
already on maps of 1554, 1558 and 1590. The Portuguese name (Ilha das
Palmeiras) could not in itself decide the question whether the discovery was
made on behalf or Portugal or of Spain; Linschoten's map, on which the
name "I. das Palmeiras" appears, also employs Portuguese names for most of
the Philippine Islands, which from the beginning were discovered and occu-
pied by Spain.
It does not seem that the discovery of the Island of Palmas (or Miangas)
would have been made on behalf of a Power other than Spain; or Portugal.
In any case for the purpose of the present affair it may be admitted that the
original title derived from discovery belonged to Spain; for the relations
between Spain and Portugal in the Celebes Sea during the first three quarters
of the 16'h century may be disregarded for the following reasons: In 1581,
i.e. prior to the appearance of the Dutch in the regions in question, the
crowns of Spain and Portugal were united. Though the struggle for sep-
aration of Portugal from Spain had already begun in December 1640, Spain
had not yet recognized the separation when it concluded in 1648 with the
Netherlands the Treaty of Munster—the earliest Treaty, as will be seen

===== PDFPAGE 18 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.) 
845
hereafter, to define the relations between Spain and the Netherlands in the
regions in question. This Treaty contains special provisions as to Portu-
guese possessions, but alone in regard to such places as were taken from the
Netherlands by the Portuguese in and after 1641. It seems necessary to
draw from this fact the conclusion that, for the relations inter se of the two
signatories of the Treaty of Munster, the same rules had to be applied both
to the possessions originally Spanish and to those originally Portuguese.
This conclusion is corroborated by the wording of Article X of the Treaty of
Utrecht of June 26t]l, 1714, which expressly maintains Article V of the Treaty
of Miinster, but only as far as Spain and the Netherlands are concerned.
It is therefore not necessary to find out which of the two nations acquired
the original title, nor what the possible effects of subsequent conquests and
cessions may have been on such title before 1648.
The fact that the island was originally called, not, as customarily, by a
native name, but by a name borrowed from a European language, and refer-
ring to the vegetation, serves perhaps to show that no landing was made
or that the island was uninhabited at the time of discovery. Indeed, the
reports on record which concern the discovery of the Island of Palmas state
only that an island was "seen", which island, according to the geographical
data, is probably identical with that in dispute. No mention is made of
landing or of contact with the natives. And in any case no signs of taking
possession or of administration by Spain have been shown or even alleged to
exist until the very recent da,te to which the reports of Captain Malone and
M. Alvarez, of 1919. contained in the United States Memorandum, relate.
It is admitted by both sides that international law underwent profound
modifications between the end of the Middle-Ages and the end of the 19*1'
century, as regards the rights of discovery and acquisition of uninhabited
regions or regions inhabited by savages or semi-civilised peoples. Both
Parties are also agreed that a juridical fact must be appreciated in the light
of the law contemporary with it, and not of the law in force at the time when
a dispute in regard to it arises or falls to be settled. The effect of discovery
by Spain is therefore to be determined by the rules of international law in
force in the first half of the 16th century—or (to take the earliest date) in the
first quarter of it, i.e. at the time when the Portuguese or Spaniards made
their appearance in the Sea of Celebes.
If the view most favourable to the American arguments is adopted—with
every reservation as to the soundness of such view—that is to say, if we con-
sider as positive law at the period in question the rule that discovery as such,
i.e. the mere fact of seeing land, without any act, even symbolical, of taking
possession, involved ipso jure territorial sovereignty and not merely an
"inchoate title", a. jus ad rent, to be completed eventually by an actual and
durable taking of possession within a reasonable time, the question arises
whether sovereignty yet existed at the critical date, i.e. the moment of con-
clusion and coming into force of the Treaty of Paris.
As regards the question which of different legal systems prevailing at suc-
cessive periods is to be applied in a particular case (the so-called intertem-
poral law), a distinction must be made between the creation of rights and
the existence of rights. The same principle which subjets the act creative
of a right to the law in force at the time the right arises, demands that the
existence of the right, in other words its continued manifestation, shall fol-
low the conditions required by the evolution of law. International law in
the 19th century, having regard to the fact that most parts of the globe were
under the sovereignty of States members of the community of nations, and

===== PDFPAGE 19 =====
846 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.)
that territories without a master had become relatively few, took accpunt of
a tendency already existing and especially developed since the middle of the
18th century, and laid down the principle that occupation, to constitute a
claim to territorial sovereignty, must be effective, that is, offer certain guar-
antees to other States and their nationals. It seems therefore imcompatible
with this rule of positive law that there should be regions which are neither
under the effective sovereignty of a State, nor without a master, but which
are reserved for the exclusive influence of one State, in virtue solely of a title
of acquisition which is no longer recognized by existing law, even if such a
title ever conferred territorial sovereignty. For these reasons, discovery
alone, without any subsequent act, cannot at the present time suffice to
prove sovereignty over the Island of Palmas (or Miangas) ; and in so far as
there is no sovereignty, the question of an abandonment properly speaking
of sovereignty by one State in order that the sovereignty of another may
take its place does not arise.
If on the other hand the view is adopted that discovery does not create a
definitive title of sovereignty, but only an "inchoate" title, such a title
exists, it is true, without external manifestation. 
However, according to
the view that has prevailed at any rate since the 19th century, an inchoate
title of discovery must be completed within a reasonable period by the
effective occupation of the region claimed to be discovered. This principle
must be applied in the present case, for the reasons given above in regard to
the rules determining which of successive legal systems is to be applied (the
so-called intertemporal law). Now, no act of occupation nor, except as to a
recent period, any exercise of sovereignty at Palmas by Spain has been
alleged. But even admitting that the Spanish title still existed as inchoate in
1898 and must be considered as included in the cession under Article III of
the Treaty of Paris, an inchoate title could not prevail over the continuous
and peaceful display of authority by another State; for such display may
prevail even over a prior, definitive title put forward by another State.
This point will be considered, when the Netherlands argument has been
examined and the allegations of either Party as to the display of their
authority can be compared.
*
In the second place the United States claim sovereignty over the Island of
Palmas on the ground of recognition by Treaty. The Treaty of Peace of
January 30th, 1648, called hereafter, in accordance with the practice of the
Parties, the "Treaty of Munster", which established a state of peace between
Spain and the States General of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, in
Article V, deals with territorial relations between the two Powers as regards
the East and West Indies (Article VI concerns solely the latter).
Article V, quoted in the French text published in the "Corps Universel
Diplomatique du Droit des Gens", by J. Du Mont, Volume VI, Part I,
1728, page 430, runs as follows1:
1 The English translation given in the Memorandum of the United States
runs as follows: "Treaty of Peace between Philip IV, Catholic King of Spain,
and their Lordships the States General of the United Provinces of the Nether-
lands. Anno 1648, January 30th.
Article V.
The navigation and trade to the East and West Indies shall be kept up and
conformably to the grants made or to be made for that effect; for the security

===== PDFPAGE 20 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/u.S.A.) 
847
La Navigation & Trafique des Indes Orientales & Occidentales sera
maintenue, selon & en conformité des Octroys sur ce donnés, ou à
donner'cy-aprés; pour seureté de quoy servira le present Traicté & la
Ratification d'iceluy, qui de part & d'autre en sera procurée; Et seront
compris sous ledit Traicté tous Potentats, Nations & Peuples, avec
lesquels lesdits Seigneurs Estatsi ou ceux de la Société des Indes Orien-
tales & Occidentales en leur nom, entre les limites de leursdits Octroys
sont en Amitié et Alliance; Et un chacun, sçavoir les susdits Seigneurs
Roy & Estats respectivement demeureront en possession et jouiront de
telles Seigneuries, Villes, Chasteaux, Forteresses, Commerce & Pays es
Indes Orientales & Occidentales, comme aussi au Brésil & sur les costes
d'Asie, Afrique & Amérique respectivement, que lesdits Seigneurs Roy
& Estats respectivement tiennent et possèdent, en ce compris spéciale-
ment les Lieux & Places que les Portugais depuis l'an mil six cent qua-
rante & un, ont pris & occupé sur lesdits Seigneurs Estats; compris aussi
les Lieux & Places qu'iceux Seigneurs Estats cy-aprés sans infraction
du present Traicté viendront à conquérir & posséder; Et les Directeurs
de la Société des Indes tant Orientales que Occidentales des Provinces-
Unies, comme aussi les Ministres, Officiers hauts & bas, Soldats &
Matelots, estans en service actuel de l'une ou de l'autre desdites Com-
pagnies, ou aiants esté en leur service, comme aussi ceux qui hors leur
service respectivement, tant en ce Pays qu'au District, desdites deux
Compagnies, continuent encor, ou pourront cy-aprés estre employés,
seront & demeureront libres & sans estre molestez en tous les Pays
estans sous l'obéissance dudit Seigneur Roy en l'Europe, pourront
voyager, trafiquer & frequenter, comme tous autres Habitans des Pays
desdits Seigneurs Estats. En outre a esté conditionné & stipulé, que
les Espagnols retiendront leur Navigation en telle manière qu'ils la
tiennent pour le present es Indes Orientales, sans se pouvoir estendre
whereof the present treaty shall serve, and the Ratification thereof on both sides,
which shall be obtained; and in the: said treaty shall be comprehended all
potentates, nations, and people, with whom the said Lords the States, or members
of the East and West India Companies in their name, within the limits of their
said grants, are in friendship and alliance. And each one, that is to say, the
said Lords the King and States, respectively, shall remain in possession of and
enjoy such lordships, towns, castles, fortresses, commerce and countries of the
East and West Indies, as well as of Brazil, and on the coasts of Asia, Africa, and
America, respectively, which the said Lords the King and States, respectively,
hold and possess, in this being specially comprised the spots and places which the
Portuguese since the year 1641 have taken from the said Lords the States and
occupied, comprising also the spots, and places which the said Lords the States
hereafter without infraction of the present treaty shall come to conquer and pos-
sess. And the directors of the East and West India Companies of the United
Provinces, as also the servants and officers, high and low, the soldiers and seamen
actually in the service of either of the said Companies, or such as have been in
their service, as also such who in this country, or within the district of the said
two companies, continue yet out of the service, but who may be employed after-
wards, shall be and remain to be free and unmolested in all the countries under
the obedience of the said Lord the King in Europe; and may sail, traffic and
resort, like all the other inhabitants of the countries of the said Lord and States.
Moreover it has been agreed and stipulated, that the Spaniards shall keep their
navigation to the East Indies, in the same manner they hold it at present, without
being at liberty to go further; and the inhabitants of those Low Countries shall
not frequent the places which the Casiilians have in the East Indies."

===== PDFPAGE 21 =====
848 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS ,'u.S.A.)
plus avant, comme aussi les Habitans de ce Pays-Bas s'abstiendront de
la fréquentation des Places, que les Castillans ont es Indes Orientales.
Thi.s article prescribes no frontiers and appoints no definite regions as
belonging to one Power or the other. On the other hand, it establishes as a
criterion the principle of possession ("demeureront en possession et jouiront
de telles seigneuries . . . . que lesdits Seigneurs Roy et Estats tiennent et
possèdent").
However liberal be the interpretation given, for the period in question, to
the notions of "tenir" (hold) and "posséder" (possess), it is hardly possible
to comprise within these terms the right arising out of mere discovery; i.e.
out of the fact that the island had been sighted. If title arising from discov-
ery, well-known and already a matter of controversy at the period in ques-
tion, were meant to be recognized by the treaty, it would probably have been
mentioned in express terms. The view here taken appears to be supported
by other provisions in the same article. It is stipulated therein that "les
Lieux & Places qu'iceux Seigneurs Estats cy-aprés sans infraction du present
Traicté viendront à conquérir et posséder" shall be placed on the same footing
as those which they possessed at the moment the treaty was concluded. 
In
view of the interpretation given by Spain and Portugal to the right of discov-
ery, and to the Bull Inter Caetera of Alexander VI. 1493, it seems that the
regions which the Treaty of Munster does not consider as definitely acquired
by the two Powers in the East and West Indies, and which may in certain
circumstances be capable of subsequent acquisition by the Netherlands, can-
not fail to include regions claimed as discovered, but not possessed. 
It
must further be remembered that Article V provides not merely a solution of
the territorial question on the basis of possession, but also a solution of the
Spanish navigation question on the basis of the status quo. Whilst Spain
may not extend the limits of her navigation in the East Indies, nationals of
the Netherlands are only excluded from "places" which the Spaniards hold
in the East Indies. Without navigation there is no possibility of occupying
and colonizing regions as yet only discovered ; on the other hand, the exclu-
sion from Spanish "places" of Netherlands navigation and commerce does
not admit of an extensive interpretation; a "place", which moreover in the
French of that period often means a fortified place, is in any case an actual
settlement implying an actual radius of activity; Article VI, for instance, of
the same treaty speaks of "lieux et places garnies de Forts, Loges et Chas-
teaux" (harbours, places, forts, lodgements or castles). For these reasons
a title based on mere discovery cannot apply to the situation considered in
Article V as already established.
Since the Treaty of Munster does not divide up the territories by means of
a geographical distribution, and since it indirectly refuses to recognize title
based on discovery as such, the bearing of the treaty on the present case is
to be determined by the proof of possession at the critical epoch.
In connection herewith no precise elements of proof based on historical
facts as to the display or even the mere affirmation of sovereignty by Spain
over the Island of Palmas have been put forward by the United States.
There is, however, one point to be considered in connection with the Treaty
of Miinster. According to a report, reproduced in the United States
Explanations and made on February 7t>>. 1927, by the Provincial Prelacy of
the Franciscan Order of Minors of the Province of St. Gregory the Great of
the Philippines, the "Islands Miangis" ("Las Islas Miangis"), situated to
the north-east of the "Island of Karekelan" (most likelv identical with the

===== PDFPAGE 22 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS C/vSE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.) 
849
Nanusa N.E. of Karakelang, one of the Talauer Islands), after having been
first in Portuguese, and then in Dutch possession, were taken by the Span-
iards in 1606. The Spanish rule under which the Spanish Franciscan Fath-
ers of the Philippines exercised the spiritual administration in the said
islands, ended in 1666, when the Captain general of the Spanish Royal
Armada dismantled all the fortified places in the Moluccas, making however
before the "Dutch Governor of Malayo" a formal declaration as to the con-
tinuance of all the rights of the Spanish Crown over the places, forts and
fortifications from which the Spaniards withdrew. 
There are further allega-
tions as to historical facts in regard 1o the same region contained in a report
of the Dutch Resident of Menado, dated August 12t1', 1857, concerning the
Talauer Islands (Talaud Islands). 
According to this report, in 1677 the
Spaniards were driven by the Dutch from Tabukan, on the Talautse or Sangi
Islands, and at that time—even "long before the coming of the Dutch to the
Archipelago of the Moluccas"—the Talauer Islands (Karakelang) had been
conquered by the Radjas of Tabukan.
According to the Dutch argument, considered hereafter, the Island of
Palmas (or Miangas) together with the Nanusa and Talauer Islands (Talaud
Islands) belonged to Tabukan. 
If this be exact, it may be considered as
noL unlikely that Miangas, in consequence of its ancient connection with
the native State of Tabukan. was in 1648 in at least indirect possession of
Spain. 
However this point has not been established by any specific proof.
But the question whether the Dutch took possession of Tabukan in 1677
in conformity with or in violation of the Treaty of Miinster can be disre-
garded, even if—in spite of the incompleteness of the evidence laid before
the Arbitrator—it were admitted that the Talautse (Sangi) Islands with
their dependencies in the Talauer- and Nanusa-Islands, Palmas (or Miangas)
possibly included, were "held and possessed" by Spain in 1648. 
For on
June 2()th. 1714, a new Treaty of Peace was concluded at Utrecht, which, in
its Article X. stipulates that the Treaty of Munster is maintained as far as
not modified and that the above-quoted Article Y remains in force as far
as it concerns Spain and the Netherlands.
Article X. quoted in the French texL published in "Actes, Mémoires et
autres pièces authentiques concernant la Paix d'Utrecht", Vol. 5, Utrecht,
1715, runs as follows:
Le Traité de Munster du 30 janvier 1648 fait entre le feu Roi Philippe
4 & les Seigneurs Etats Généraux, servira de base au présent Traité,
& aura lieu en tout, autant qu'il ne sera pas changé par les Articles
suivans, & pour autant qu'il est applicable, & pour ce qui regarde les
Articles 5 & 16 de ladite Paix de Munster, ils n'auront lieu qu'en ce qui
concerne seulement lesdites deux hautes Puissances contractantes &
leurs Sujets 1.
Tf—quite apart from the influence of an intervening state of war on treaty
rights—this clause had not simply meant the confirmation of the principle
of actual possession—at the time of the conclusion of the Treaty of Utrecht
—as regulating the territorial status of the Contracting Powers in the East
1 Translation. The Treaty of Miinster of January 30th, 1648, concluded
between the late King Philip IV and the States General, shall form the basis of
the present Treaty and shall hold good in every respect in so far as it is not
modified by the following articles, and in so far as it is applicable, and. as regards
Articles 5 and 16 of the said Peace of Miinster, these Articles shall only hold good
in so far as concerns the aforesaid High Contracting Parties and their subjects.
54

===== PDFPAGE 23 =====
8 5 0 
ISLAND 
OF 
PALMAS 
CASE 
( N E T H E R L A N D S / ' U . S . K.)
and West Indies and if, on the contrary, a restitution of any territories
acquired before the war in violation of the Treaty of Miinster had been
envisaged, specific provisions would no doubt have been inserted.
There is further no trace of evidence that Spain ever claimed at a later
opportunity, for instance in connection with the territorial rearrangements
at the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the restitution of territories taken or
withheld from her in violation of the Treaties of Miinster or Utrecht.
As it is not proved that Spain, at the beginning of 1648 or in June 1714,
was in possession of the Island of Palmas (or Miangas), there is no proof that
Spain acquired by the Treaty of Munster or the Treaty of Utrecht a title to
sovereignty over the island which, in accordance with the said Treaties, and
as long as they hold good, could have been modified by the Netherlands only
in agreement with Spain.
It is, therefore, unnecessary to consider whether subsequently Spain by
any express or conclusive action, abandoned the right, which the said Treaties
may have conferred upon her in regard to Palmas (or Miangas). Moreover
even if she had acquired a title she never intended to abandon, it would
remain to be seen whether continuous and peaceful display of sovereignty
by any other Power at a later period might not have superseded even con-
ventional rights.
It appears further to be evident that Treaties concluded by Spain with
third Powers recognizing her sovereignty over the "Philippines" could not
be binding upon the Netherlands and, as such Treaties do not mention the
island in dispute, they are not available even as indirect evidence.
We thus come back to the question whether, failing any Treaty which, as
between the States concerned, decides unequivocally what is the situation
as regards the island, the existence of territorial sovereignty is established
with sufficient soundness by other facts.
Although the United States Government does not take up the position
that Spanish sovereignty must be recognized because it was actually exer-
cised, the American Counter-Case none the less states that "there is at least
some evidence of Spanish activities in the island". In these circumstances
it is necessary to consider whether and to what extent the territorial soveieignly
of Spain was manifested in or in regard to the Island of Palmas for Miangas,).
Here it may be well to refer to a passage taken from information supplied by
the Spanish to the American Government and communicated by the latter
to the Netherlands Legation at Washington, in a note dated April 25t!l,
1914. The passage in question is reproduced in the text and in the annex of
the United States' Memorandum, and runs as follows:
It appears, therefore, that this Island of Palmas or Miangas, being
within the limits marked by the Bull of Alexander the Sixth, and the
agreement celebrated between Spain and Portugal regarding the posses-
sion of the Maluco. must have been seen by the Spaniards on the
different voyages of discovery which were made in these parts, and that
it belonged to Spain, at least by right, until the Philippine Archipelago
was ceded by the Treaty of Paris; but precise data of acts of dominion
which Spain may have exercised in this island have not been found.
This is the data and information which we have been able to find
referring to said island, with which without doubt, because of the small
importance it had. the discoverers did not occupy themselves, neither

===== PDFPAGE 24 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.) 
851
afterwards the governors of the Philippines, nor the historians and
chroniclers, such as Herrera and Navarrette and the fathers Colin and
Pastelle of the Society of Jesus, who refer in their works to the above-
mentioned data without detailing any information about the said
island.
It further results from the Explanations furnished by the Government of
the United States at the request of the Arbitrator that an exhaustive exami-
nation of the records which were handed over to thé American authorities
under Article VIII of the Treaty of Paris, namely such as pertain to judicial,
notarial and administrative matters, has revealed nothing bearing on the
allegations made by natives of Palmas in 1919 to Captain Malone and Mr.
Alvarez on the subject of regular visits of Spanish ships, even gunboats, and
on the collection of the "Cedula"-tax. This being so, no weight can be
given to such allegations as to the exercise of Spanish sovereignty in recent
times—quite apart from the fact that the evidence in question belongs to
an epoch subsequent to the rise of the dispute.
Apart from the facts already referred to concerning the period of discovery,
and the mention of a letter which was sent on July 31^, 1604, by the
Spanish pilot Bartolome Perez from the Island of Palmas and the contents of
which are not known, and apart from certain allegations as to commercial
relations between Palmas and Mindanao, the documents laid before the
Arbitrator contain no trace of Spanish activities of any kind specifically on
the Island of Palmas.
Neither is there any official document mentioning the Island of Palmas as
belonging to an administrative or judicial district of the former Spanish
Government in the Philippines. In a letter emanating from the Provincial
Prelacy of the Franciscan Order of Minors mentioned above, it is said that the
Islands of "Mata and Palmas should belong (deben pertenecer) to the group
of Islands of Sarangani and consequently to the District of Dâvao in the
Island of Mindanao". It is further said in this letter that "the Island of
Palrnas. as it was near to Mindanao, must have been administered (debiô
ser administrada) spiritually in the last years of Spanish dominion by the
fathers who resided in the District of Dâvao". It results from the very
terms of this letter, which places the ''Islands Miangis" to the north-east of
the Island-Karakelang ("Karekelan1'), that these statements, which suppose
the existence of Mata, are not based immediately on information taken on
the spot, but are rather conjectures of the author as to what seems probable.
In the Rejoinder filed by the United States Government there is an extract
from a letter of the Dutch missionary Steller, dated December 9*1', 1895.
It appears from this letter that the Resident of Menado, at the same time as
he set up the Netherlands coat of arms at Palmas (or Miangas), had had the
intention to present a medal to the native Chief of the island, "because the
said chief, recently detained in Mindanao on business, would not let the
commanding officer of a Spanish warship force the Spanish flag upon him".
These facts, supposing they are correct, are no proof of a display of sover-
eignty over Palmas (or Miangas) ; rather the contrary. 
If the Spanish naval
authorities to whom the administrative inspection of the southern Philippine
Islands belonged, were convinced that the Island of Palmas was Spanish
territory, the refusal of the native chief to accept the Spanish flag would
naturally have led either to direct action on the Island in order to affirm
Spanish sovereignty, or, if the Netherlands rights had been invoked, to
negotiations such as were the sequel to General Wood's visit in 1906.

===== PDFPAGE 25 =====
852 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE 
(NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.)
As regards the information concerning the native language or knowledge
of Spanish, even if sufficiently established, it is too vague to indicate the
existence of a political and administrative connection between Palmas (or
Miangas) and Mindanao.
In a telegram from General Leonard Wood to the Bureau of Insular
Affairs, reproduced in the American Explanations, it is stated that "the
administrative inspection of the islands in the south (i.e. of the Philippines),
especially round their coasts, belonged absolutely to the naval Spanish
authorities". As papers pertaining to military and naval matters were not
handed over to the American authorities under the Treaty of Paris, the files
relating to the said administrative inspection are not in the possession of the
United States. The fact that not the ordinary provincial agencies but the
navy were in charge of the inspection of the islands in the south, together
with another incidentally mentioned by Major General E. S. Otis; in a
report of August 31st. 1899, namely the existence of a state of war or at least
of subdued hostility amongst the Moros against Spanish rule, leads to the
very probable—though not necessary—conclusion that the complete
absence of evidence as to display of Spanish sovereignty over the Island of
Palmas is not due to mere chance, but is to be explained by the absence of
interest of Spain in the establishment or the maintenance of her rule over a
small island lying far off the coast of a distant and only incompletely subdued
province.
It has been remarked, not without reason, that the United States, having
acquired sovereignty by session only in 1898, were at some disadvantage for
the collection of evidence concerning the original acquisition and the display
of sovereignty over Palmas. The Arbitrator has no possibility of taking
into account this situation; he can found his award only on the facts alleged
and proved by the Parties, and he is bound to consider all proved facLs which
are pertinent in his opinion. Moreover it does not appear that the Spanish
Government refused to furnish the documents requested.
Among the methods of indirect proof, not of the exercise of sovereignty,
but of its existence in law, submitted by the United States, there is the
evidence from maps. This subject has been very completely developed in the
Memorandum of the United States and has also been fully dealt with in
the Netherlands Counter-Memorandum, as well as in the United States
Rejoinder. A comparison of the information supplied by the two Parties
shows that only with the greatest caution can account be taken of maps in
deciding a question of sovereignty, at any rate in the case of an island such as
Palmas (or Miangas). Any maps which do not precisely indicate the polit-
ical distribution of territories, and in particular the Island of Palmas (or
Miangas) clearly marked as such, must be rejected forthwith, unless they
contribute—supposing that they are accurate—to the location of geograph-
ical names. Moreover, indications of such a nature are only of value when
there is reason to think that the cartographer has not merely referred to
already existing maps—as seems very often to be the case—but that he has
based his decision on information carefully collected for the purpose. Above
all, then, official or semi-official maps seem capable of fulfilling these condi-
tions, and they would be of special interest in cases where they do not assert
the sovereignty of the country of which the Government has caused them
to be issued.

===== PDFPAGE 26 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.) 
853
If the Arbitrator is satisfied as to the existence of legally relevant facts
which contradict the statements of cartographers whose sources of informa-
tion are not known, he can attach no weight to the maps, however numerous
and generally appreciated they may be.
The first condition required of maps that are to serve as evidence on points
of law is their geographical accuracy. It must here be pointed out that not
only maps of ancient date, but also modern, even official or semi-official maps
seem wanting in accuracy. Thus, a. comparison of the maps submitted to
the Arbitrator shows that there is doubt as to the existence or the names of
several islands which should be close to Palmas (or Miangas), and in about
the same latitude. The St. Joannes Islands, Hunter's Island and the Isle of
Mata are shown, all or some of them, on several maps even of quite recent
date, although their existence seems very doubtful. The non-existence of
the Island of Mata and the identity of the St. Joannes and HunLer's Islands
with Palmas, though they appear on several maps as distinct and rather
distant islands, may, on the evidence laid before the Arbitrator, be con-
sidered as fairly certain.
The "Century Atlas" (Exhibit No. 8 of the American Memorandum I and
the map published in 1902 by the Bureau of Insular Affairs of the United Slates
(Exhibit No. 11), show "Mata I.", "Palmas I." and "Haycock or Hunter
I". The Spanish map (Captain Montero), reproduced by the War De-
partment of the United States (Exhibit No. 9) also mentions these three
islands, although "Haycock I." and "Hunter I." are here different islands.
The same is to be said of the map of the Challenger Expedition of 1885.
The only large scale map submitted to the Arbitrator which, as appears from
inscriptions on it, is directly based on researches on the spot, is that attached
to the Netherlands Memorandum (British Admiralty Chart No. 2575). Now
this map shows neither an island of Mata, nor of Hunter, nor of any other
name in the regions where they should be, according to the other maps, and
Haycock Island is indicated at two points other than that adopted in "Ex-
hibits Nos. 8 & 11". Whatever be the accuracy of the British Admiralty
Chart for the details in question, these points show that only with the greatest
caution use can be made of maps as indications of the existence of sovereignty
over Palmas (or Miangas). The maps which, in the view of the United
States, are of an official or semi-official character and are of Spanish or
American origin are that of Captain Montero and that of the Insular Depart-
ment, referred to above (Exhibits Nos. 8 & 11). The first mentioned gives
for that matter no indication as to political frontiers, and the second only
reproduces the lines traced by the treaty of December 10*1", 1898. They have
therefore no bearing on the point in question, even apart from the evident
inaccuracies, at least as regards Hunier Island, which they appear to contain
precisely in the region under consideration.
As regards maps of Dutch origin, there are in panicular two which, in the
view of the United States, possess an official character and which might
exclude Palmas (or Miangas) from the Dutch possessions. The first of
these, published in 1857 by M. Bogaerts, lithographer to the Royal Military
Academy, and dedicated to the Governor of that institution, if it possesses
the official character attributed to it by the American Memorandum and
disputed by the Netherlands Countei-Memorandum, might serve to indicate
that the island was not considered at the period in question as Dutch but as
Spanish territory. Anyhow, a map affords only an indication—and that a
very indirect one—and, except when annexed to a legal instrument, has not
the value of such an instrument, involving recognition or abandonment of

===== PDFPAGE 27 =====
854 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.)
rights. The importance of this map can only be judged in the light of facts
prior or subsequent to 1857, which the Netherlands Government alleges in
order to prove the exercise of sovereignty- over the Island of Palmas (or
Miangas) ; these facts, together with the cartographical evidence relied upon
in their support or submitted in connection with the question of the right
location of the Island or Islands called "Meangis", will be considered at the
same time as the Netherlands' arguments. While Bogaerts' map does not,
as it stands, furnish proof of the recognition of Spanish sovereignty, it must
further be pointed out that it is inaccurate as regards the group of islands
marked "Meangis" and indicated on this map somewhat to the north of
"Nanoesa", as well as in other points, for example the shape of Mindanao
and the colouring of certain small islands.
The conclusions drawn in the United States Memorandum from the second
map, i.e. the atlas published by the Ministry for the Colonies (1897-1904)
appear to be refuted by the information contained in the Netherlands Counter-
Memorandum. A copy of a detailed map from the same atlas is there shown
which represents "P. Miangis (E. Palmas)" amongst Dutch possessions,
not only by the coloured contours, but also because it indicates the Sarangani
Islands as "Amerikaansch". The general map, on the other hand, repro-
duced as "Exhibit No. 10" in the American Memorandum, excludes the
former island from Dutch territory, by a line of demarcation between the
different colonial possessions. There seems to be no doubt that the special
map must prevail over the general, even though the latter was published
three months later.
As to the special map contained in the first edition of the same atlas
(Atlas der Nederlandsche Bezittingen in Oost-Indië [1883-1885]), where the
"Melangies" are reproduced as a group of islands north of the Nanusa and
distinct from "Palmas", the same observations apply as to Bogaerts'
map, which is fairly similar on this point. The "Explanations" filed by the
Netherlands Government make it clear that the authors of the map did not
rely on new and authentic information about the region here in question,
but reproduced older maps.
In the last place there remains to be considered title arising out of con-
tiguity. Although States have in certain circumstances maintained that
islands relatively close to their shores belonged to them in virtue of their
geographical situation, it is impossible to show the existence of a rule of
positive international law to the effect that islands situated outside territorial
waters should belong to a State from the mere fact that its territory forms
the terra firma (nearest continent or island of considerable size). Not only
would it seem that there are no precedents sufficiently frequent and suffi-
ciently precise in their bearing to establish such a rule of international law.
but the alleged principle itself is by its very nature so uncertain and con-
tested that even Governments of the same State have on different occasions
maintained contradictory opinions as to its soundness. The principle of
contiguity, in regard to islands, may not be out of place when it is a question
of allotting them to one State rather than another, either by agreement
between the Parties, or by a decision not necessarily based on law; but as a
rule establishing ipso jure the presumption of sovereignty in favour of a
particular State, this principle would be in conflict with what has been said
as to territorial sovereignty and as to the necessary relation between the right
to exclude other States from a region and the duty to display therein the

===== PDFPAGE 28 =====
ISLAND OF P ALMAS C \SE (NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.) 
855
activities of a State. Nor is this principle of contiguity admissible as a legal
method of deciding questions of territorial sovereignty; for it is wholly
lacking in precision and would in its application lead to arbitrary results.
This would be especially true in a case such as that of the island in question,
which is not relatively close to one single continent, but forms part of a large
archipelago in which strict délimitai ions between the different parts are not
naturally obvious.
There lies, however, at the root of the idea of contiguity one point which
must be considered also in regard to the Island of Palmas (or Miangas).
It has been explained above that in the exercise of territorial sovereignty
there are necessarily gaps, intermittence in time and discontinuity in space.
This phenomenon will be particularly noticeable in the case of colonial
territories, partly uninhabited or as yet partly unsubdued. The fact that a
State cannot prove display of sovereignty as regards such a portion of terri-
tory cannot forthwith be interpreted as showing that sovereignty is in-
existent. Each case must be appreciated in accordance with the particular
circumstances.
It is, however, to be observed that international arbitral jurisprudence in
disputes on territorial sovereignty (e.g. the award in the arbitration between
Italy and Switzerland concerning the Alpe Craivarola; Lafontaine, Pasicrisie
Internationale, pp. 201-209) would seem to attribute greater weight to—
even isolated—acts of display of sovereignty than to continuity of ter-
ritory, even if such continuity is combined with the existence of natural
boundaries.
As regards groups of islands, it is possible that a group may under certain
circumstances be regarded as in law a unit, and that the fate of the principal
part may involve the rest. Here, however, we must distinguish between, on
the one hand, the act of first taking possession, which can hardly extend to
every portion of territory, and, on the other hand, the display of sovereignty
as a continuous and prolonged manifestation which must make itself felt
through the whole territory.
As regards the territory forming the subject of the present dispute, it must
be remembered that it is a somewhat isolated island, and therefore a territory
clearly delimited and individualised. 
It is moreover an island permanently
inhabited, occupied by a population sufficiently numerous for it to be
impossible that acts of administration could be lacking for very long periods.
The memoranda of both Parties assert that there is communication by boat
and even with native craft between the Island of Palmas (or Miangas) and
neighbouring regions. The inability in such a case to indicate any acts of
publie administration makes it difficult to imagine the actual display of
sovereignty, even if the sovereignty be regarded as confined within such
narrow limits a.s would be supposed for a small island inhabited exclusively
by natives.
IV.
The .Netherlands' aiguments contend that the East India Company estab-
lished Dutch sovereignty over the Island of Palmas (or Miangas) as early as
the 17(|1 century, by means of conventions with the princes of Tabukan
(Taboekan) and Taruna (Taroena). two native chieftains of the Island of
Sangi (Groot Sangihe). the principal island of the Talautse Isles (Sangi
Islands), and that sovereignty has been displayed during the past two
centuries.

===== PDFPAGE 29 =====
856 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.)
In the annexes to the Netherlands Memorandum the texts of conventions
concluded by the Dutch East India Company (and, after 1795, by the
Netherlands State), in 1677, 1697, 1720, 1758, 1828, 1885 and 1899 with the
Princes, Radjas or Kings, as they are indiscriminately called, of Tabukan,
Taruna and Kandahar (Kandhar)-Taruna. 
All these principalities are
situated in the Northern part of the Island of Sangi (Groot Sangihe or Sang-
hii) and, at any rate since 1885, include, besides parts of that island, also
certain small islands further north, the Nanusa Islands—all incontestably
Dutch—and, according to the Netherlands, also the Island of Palmas (or
Miangas). These successive contracts are one much like another; the more
recent are more developed and better suited to modern ideas in economic,
religious and other matters, but they are all based on the conception that the
prince receives his principality as a fief of the Company or the Dutch State,
which is suzerain. Their eminently political nature is confirmed by the
supplementary agreements of 1771, 1779 and 1782. concerning the obliga-
tions of vassals in the event of war. The dependence of the vassal State is
ensured by the important powers given to the nearest representative of the
colonial Government and, in the last resort, to that Government itself.
The most recent of these contracts prior to the cession of the Philippines to
the United States, that of 1885, contains, besides the allocation of powers for
internal administration, the following provisions also, in regard to inter-
national interests: exclusion of the Prince from any direct relations with
foreign Powers, and even with their nationals in important economic matters ;
the currency of the Dutch Indies to be legal tender; the jurisdiction over
foreigners to belong to the Government of the Dutch Indies ; the vassal is
bound to suppress slavery, the White Slave Traffic and piracy; he is also
bound to render assistance to the shipwrecked.
Even the oldest contract, dated 1677, contains clauses binding the vassal
of the East India Company to refuse to admit the nationals of other States,
in particular Spain, into his territories, and to tolerate no religion other than
protestantism, reformed according to the doctrine of the Synod of Dordrecht.
Similar provisions are to be found in the other contracts of the 17th and 18fi>
centuries. If both Spain and the Netherlands had in reality displayed their
sovereignty over Palmas (or Miangas), it would seem that, during so long a
period, collisions between the two Powers must almost inevitably have
occurred.
The authenticity of these contracts cannot be questioned. The fact that
true copies, certified by evidently the competent officials of the Netherlands
Government, have been supplied and have been forwarded to the Arbitrator
through the channels laid down in the Special Agreement, renders the pro-
duction of facsimiles of texts and of signatures or seals superfluous. 
This
observation equally applies to other documents or extracts from documents
taken from the archives of the East India Company, or of the Netherlands
Government. There is no reason to suppose that typographical errors in
the reproduction of texts may have any practical importance for the evidence
in question.
The fact that these contracts were renewed from time to time and appear
to indicate an extension of the influence of the suzerain, seems to show
that the regime of suzerainty has been effective. 
The sovereignty of the
Netherlands over the Sangi and Talauer Islands is moreover not dis-
puted. There is here a manifestation of territorial sovereignty normal

===== PDFPAGE 30 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS C^SE (NETHERLANDS/u.S.A.) 
857
for such a region. The questions to be solved in, the present case are the
following:
Was the island of Palmas (or Miangas) in 1898 a part of territory under Nether-
lands' sovereignty?
Did this sovereignty actually exist in 1898 in regard to Palmas {or Miangas)
and are the facts proved which were; alleged on this subject?
If the claim to sovereignty is based on the continuous and peaceful display
of State authority, the fact of such display must be shown precisely in rela-
tion to the disputed territory. 
It is not necessary that there should be a
special administration established in this territory; but it cannot suffice for
the territory to be attached to another by a legal relation which is not recog-
nized in international law as valid against a State contesting this claim to
sovereignty; what is essential in such a case is the continuous and peaceful
display of actual power in the contested region.
According to the description of the frontiers of the territory of Taruna
annexed to the contract of 1885. the list of dependencies of Taruna on the
Talauer Islands mentions first the different islands of Nanusa, and ends by
the words "ten slotte nog het eiland Melangis (Palmas)", "and lastly the
island Melangis (Palmas)".
The similar description of frontiers attached to the contract of 1899 states
that the Islands of Nanusa (including the Island of "Miangas") belong to
the territory of Kandahar-Taruna. 
If these two mentions refer to the Island
of Palmas (or Miangas), it must be recognized that that island, at any rate
nominally, belongs to the vassal State in question; it is by no means necessary
to prove the existence of a special contract with a chieftain of Palmas (or
Miangas).
However much the opinions of the Parties may differ as to the existence of
proof of the display of Dutch sovereignty over the Island of Palmas (or
Miangas), the reports, furnished by both sides, of the visit of General Wood, in
January 1906, show that at that time there were at least traces of continuous
relations between the island in dispute and neighbouring Dutch posses-
sions, and even traces of Dutch sovereignty. General Wood noted his sur-
prise that the Dutch flag was flying on the beach and on the boat which came
to meet the American ship. According to information gathered by him, the
flag had been there for 15 years and perhaps even longer. Since the contract
of 1885 with Taruna and that of 1899 with Kandahar-Taruna comprise
Palmas (or Miangas) within the territories of a native State under the
suzerainty of the Netherlands and since it has been established that in 1906
on the said island a state of things existed showing at least certain traces of
display of Netherlands sovereignty, it is now necessary to examine what is
the nature of the facts invoked as proving such sovereignty, and to what
periods such facts relate. This examination will show whether or not the
Netherlands have displayed sovereignty over the Island of Palmas (or
Miangas) in an effective continuous and peaceful manner at a period at which
such exercise may have excluded the acquisition of sovereignty, or a title to
such acquisition, by the United States of America.
Before beginning to consider the facts alleged by the Netherlands in sup-
port of their arguments, there are two preliminary points, in regard to which
the Parties also put forward different views, which require elucidation.
These relate to questions raised by the United States : firstly the power of the

===== PDFPAGE 31 =====
8 5 8 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (.NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.)
East India Company to act validly under international law. on behalf of the
Netherlands, in particular by concluding so-called political contracts with
native rulers; secondly the identity or non-identity of the island in dispute
with the island to which the allegations of the Netherlands as to display of
sovereignty would seem to relate.
The acts of the East India Company (Générale treoctroyeerde Nederlandsch
Oost-Indische Compagnie), in view of occupying or colonizing the regions
at issue in the present affair must, in international law, be entirely assimil-
ated to acts of the Netherlands State itself. From the end of the 16fh till the
19th century, companies formed by individuals and engaged in economic
pursuits (Chartered Companies), were invested by the State to whom they
were subject with public powers for the acquisition and administration of
colonies. The Dutch East India Company is one of the best known.
Article V of the Treaty of Munster and consequently also the Treaty of
Utrecht clearly show that the East and West India Companies were
entitled to create situations recognized by international law; for the peace
between Spain and the Netherlands extends to "tous Potentats, Nations &
Peuples" with whom the said Companies, in the name of the States of the
Netherlands, "entre les limites de leurdits Octroys sont en Amitié et
Alliance". The conclusion of conventions, even of a political nature, was,
by Article XXXV of the ! Charter of 1602, within the powers of the Com-
pany. It is a question for decision in each individual case whether a
contract concluded by the Company falls within the range of simple eccnomic
transactions or is of a political and public administrative nature.
As regards contracts between a State or a Company such as the Dutch East
India Company and native princes or chiefs of peoples not recognized as
members of the community of nations, they are not, in the international law
sense, treaties or conventions capable of creating rights and obligations such
as may. in international law. arise out of treaties. But, on the other hand,
contracts of this nature are not wholly void of indirect effects on situations
governed by international law; if they do not constitute titles in international
law, they are none the less facts of which that law must in certain circum-
stances take account. From the time of the discoveries until recent times,
colonial territory has very often been acquired, especially in the East Indies,
by means of contracts with the native authorities, which contracts leave the
existing organisation more or less intact as regards the native population,
whilst granting to the colonizing Power, besides economic advantages such as
monopolies or navigation and commercial privileges, also the exclusive
direction of relations with other Powers, and the right to exercise public
authority in regard to their own nationals and to foreigners. The form of
the legal relations created by such contracts is most generally that of suzerain
and vassal, or of the so-called colonial protectorate.
In substance, it is not an agreement between equals; it is rather a form of
internal organisation of a colonial territory, on the basis of autonomy for
the natives. In order to regularise the situation as regards other States,
this organisation requires to be completed by the establishment of powers
to ensure the fulfilment of the obligations imposed by international law on
every State in regard to its own territory. And thus suzerainty over the
native State becomes the basis of territorial sovereignly as towards other
members of the community of nations. It is the sum-total of functions thus
allotted either to the native authorities or to those of the colonial Power

===== PDFPAGE 32 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS, CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.) 
859
which decides the question whether at any certain period the conditions
required for the existence of sovereignty are fulfilled. 
It is a question to be
decided in each case whether such a regime is to be considered as effective
or whether it is essentially fictitious, either for the whole or a part of the
territory. There always remains reserved the question whether the estab-
lishment of such a system is not forbidden b^i the pre-existing rights of
other States.
The point of view here adopted by the Arbitrator is—at least in principle
—in conformity with the attitude taken up by the United States in the note
already quoted above, from the Secretary of State to the Spanish Minister,
dated January 7th. 1900, and relating to two small islands lying just outside
the line drawn by the Treaty of Paris, but claimed by the United States
under the said Treaty. The note states that the two islands "have not
hitherto been directly administered by Spain, but have been successfully
claimed by Spain as a part of the dominions of her subject, the Sultan of
Sulu. As such they have been administered by Sulu agencies, under some
vague form of resident supervision by Spanish agencies, which latter have
been withdrawn as a result of the recent war."
This system of contracts between colonial Powers and native princes and
chiefs is even expressly approved by Article V of the Treaty of Munster
quoted above; for, among the "Potentates, Nations and Peoples", with
whom the Dutch State or Companies may have concluded treaties of alliance
and friendship in the East and West Indies, are necessarily the native
princes and chiefs.
The Arbitrator can therefore nol exclude the contracts invoked by the
Netherlands from being taken into consideration in the present case.
As to the identity of the island in dispute with the islands "Melangis
(Palmas)" and "Miangas" in the contracts of 1885 and 1899 respectively,
this must be considered as established by the large scale map which was
sent to the Governor General of the Netherlands Indies by the Resident
ofMenado in January 1886 and which indicates in different colours the
administrative districts on the Sangi and Talauer Islands in almost complete
conformity with the description of the territory of Taruna given in the annex
to the contract of 1885, save that the name of Nanusa, applied to the group
of seven islands by the contract, is there given to a single island of this group,
usually called Merampi (Mehampi). This large scale map. prepared evi-
dently for administrative purposes, of which a reproduction has been filed
with the Explanations of the Netherlands Government, shows an isolated
island "Palmas of Melangis" which, though not quite correct in size and
shape and though about 40' too much to the south and 20' too much to the
east, cannot but correspond to Palmas (or Miangas), since the most reliable
detailed modern maps, in particular the British Admiralty Chart, show no
other island but Palmas (or Miangas) between the Talauer or Nanusa
Islands and Mindanao.
This comparatively correct location of the island is supported by earlier
maps. The map edited at Amsterdam by Covens and Mortier at a .date
not exactly known, but certainly during the 18*'» century, shows at about the
place of Palmas (or Miangas) a single island with the inscription '"l regie
P° Menangus" (the right island Menangus) as distinguished from the
"engelsche Eilanden Menangus" and from the group of the Nanusa. This
map proves that before that time uncertainty had existed as to the real

===== PDFPAGE 33 =====
860 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE 
(NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.)
existence of one or several islands Menangus, an uncertainty evidently due
in its origin to the mention of the existence of "Islands Meangis" made by
the Englishman Dampier, in his book published in 1698.
In conformity with this statement by Covens and Mortier, the map
contained in the book published in 1855 by the navigator Cuarteron shows
a single island "Mianguis'r, not in exactly the place of the island in dispute,
but distinct from the "Nanuse" and lying about midway between Cape San
Augustin and the "Nanuse". Cuarteron's map shows "Mianguis" dis-
tinctly as a Dutch possession—by colour expressly indicated as relating to
political boundaries; it is accompanied by geographical and statistical
information and due to an author who travelled extensively in these parts
(1841-1849), and against whose reliability not sufficient reasons have been
given. Among other points the explanation gives for "Mianguis" the com-
paratively exact geographical location (latitude north 5° 33' 30" [Special
Agreement 5° 35']) ; longitude east of Rome 114° 42' 00" = 127° 12'53'east
of Greenwich (Special Agreement 126° 36') and also detailed though evi-
dently only approximative statistical information about the composition of
the population. 
It further appears from Cuarteron's book that "Mianguis"
is something apart from the Nanusa, though Cuarteron observes that the
"Nanuse" Islands are little known by the geographers under the name of
"Mianguis".
A proof of the fact that the Dutch authorities were quite aware of the
identity of "Miangas" with the island charted on many maps as "Palmas"
is to be found in the reports of the Commanders of the Dutch Government
Steamer Raaf (November 1896) and of H.M.S. Edi (June 1898). These
officers mention expressly the double name and give the almost exact
nautical location of the island then visited.
One observation is however to be made. The island, shown on the maps
and mentioned in the contracts, bears different names: Melangis. Miangas,
Miangus, Mianguis. In different documents referred to in the Netherlands
Memorandum and Counter-Memorandum more than a dozen other varia-
tions of the name appear, although in the opinion of the Netherlands Govern-
ment they all concern the same island. These differences, sometimes
considerable at first sight, are sufficiently explained by the statements of lin-
guistic experts, produced by the Netherlands Government. The peculiarity
of the native language from which the name of the island is borrowed and
the difficulty of transposing the sounds of this language into a western
alphabet seem not only to make comprehensible the existence of different
spellings, but to explain why precisely these variations have appeared.
Differences of spelling are even recorded as such in documents as early as a
letter, dated May 1 lth, 1701, of the Governor of the Moluccas and a report,
dated September 12th, 1726. Moreover, the difference of spelling would not
justify the conclusion that the more or less different names referred to
different islands ; for in the whole region in question no other island has been
mentioned to which these names—or at least most of them—would better
apply; for the Island of Tangulandang, with the place Minangan already
referred to, is clearly distinguished from the island of Miangas in the docu-
ments of both the 18th and the 19'!» centuries relating to the dependencies
of Tabukan.
No evidence has been submitted to support the supposition that the
island, appearing on some old maps as "'t regte Menangus" would be
identical with Ariaga (Marare), which, according to a statement of Melvill
van Carnbee. mentioned in the United States Memorandum, is uninhabited.

===== PDFPAGE 34 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/u.S.A.) 
861
Great stress is laid in the Rejoinder of the United States on the fact that
the Nanusa Isles or some islands of this group are designated by several
distinguished cartographers and navigators of the \9^ century as "Islands
Meangis" or by some similar name, and that amongst these cartographers
and sailors some are Dutchmen, in particular Baron Melvill van Carnbee.
This statement which is, no doubt, exact, cannot however prove that the
island Miangas mentioned as a dependency of Tabukan or Taruna or
Kandahar-Taruna is to be identified with the "Is. Meangi" and therefore
with the Nanusa Isles. It is clear that the cartographers referred to apply
the name of "lies Meangis" or some similar name to a group of islands.
On the other hand, the island the identity of which is disputed can be but a
single, distant, isolated island. The attribution of the name Meangis to the
Nanusa seems to be an error, because the official documents laid before the
Arbitrator which belong about to the same period as the maps mentioning
the "Is. Meangis", make a clear distinction between the principal islands
composing the Nanusa and the island of Miangas or Meangas or Melangis,
though the latter is considered as "onderhoorig" of the Nanusa Isles. The
identification of the Nanusa with "Meangis" Islands may be explained by
the desire to locate somewhere the Meangis Islands, famous since Dampier's
voyage. Seeing that up to very recent times an extraordinary inexactitude
about the names and the location of the islands in precisely that part of the
Celebes Sea is shown to exist by almost all the maps filed by the Parties,
including the two maps of Melvill van Carnbee, an erroneous attribution of
the name "Miangas", even by Dutch cartographers, is easily possible.
It is not excluded that the three "English Menangis Islands" which are
located on some maps to the east of the "right Menangis'' and of which a
detailed map with indication of the depth of the surrounding sea has been
filed, did in fact exist, but have disappeared in consequence of earthquakes
such as reported by Cuarteron.
Finally it may be noted that the information concerning Palmas or the
other islands such as St. Juan, Mata, Hunter Island, which are to be iden-
tified with it, contains, except for the most recent period, nothing which
relates to the population of the island ; moreover all these names, given to the
island, except Mata, may have been ^iven by navigators who did not land or
get into contact with the natives. Miangas however is a native name,
which the inhabitants must have communicated to the chiefs to whom they
were subject and to the navigators with whom they came in touch. The
name of Miangas as designating an inhabited place (negorij) is much older
than the establishment of the more centralized village in 1892.
It results from these statements that, when the contracts of 1885 and 1899
mentioned, in connection with, but distinct from the Nanusa, a single island
Melangis or Miangis as belonging to Taruna or Kandahar-Taruna, only the
island in dispute can have been meant, and that this island has been known
under these same or similar names at least since the 18t]l century. No
plausible suggestion has been made as to what the single island "Miangas",
the existence of which cannot be doubted, might be, if it is not the'island in
dispute.
The special map on sheet 14 (issued in 1901) of the "Atlas van Nederlandsch
Oost-Indiè" (1897-1904), in showing "P. Miangis (Palmas E.)" as a Dutch
possession in the place indicated in the Special Agreement, is in conformity
with earlier maps and information, particularly with the Government's
special map of 1886. Under these circumstances no weight can be given
to the fact that on Bogaerts' map of 1857 and in the atlas of Stemfort and

===== PDFPAGE 35 =====
862 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/u.S.A.)
Sielhofl (1883-85), as well as on other maps, a group of islands called
Meangis, or a similar name, appears.
The preliminary questions being settled, the evidence laid before the
Arbitrator by the Netherlands Government in support of its claim is now
to be considered.
As regards the documents relating to the 17th and 18t]l centuries, which
in the view of the Netherlands show that already at that date the Prince of
Tabukan had not only claimed, but also actually displayed a certain authority
over Palmas (or Miangas), the following must be noted:
The Netherlands Government gives great weight to the fact that Dutch
navigators who. in search of the islands Meangis mentioned by Dampier.
were sailing in the seas south of Mindanao and whose reports are at least in
part preserved, not only came in sight of Palmas (or Miangas), but were
able to state that the island belonged to the native State of Tabukan, which
was under Dutch suzerainty as shown by the contracts of November 3rd,
1677, and September 26th. 1697.
The existence of Dutch rule would be proved by the fact that the Prince's
flag—i.e. the Dutch East India Company's flag—was seen being waved by
the people of the island when the Dutch ships De Bye, Larycque and De Peer
were in sight of the island on November 21st, 1700, but were prevented from
landing by the conditions of the sea. The commander of the Larycque, who
had already sighted the island on November 12th of the same year, was
instructed to make more precise investigations by landing, and he was able to
do so on December 9th and 10th. Not only was the Prince's flag again
hoisted by the natives, but the inhabitants informed the sailors that the
name of the island was "Meangis". They gave to the commander a docu-
ment—lost since that time—which, dating from 1681 and emanating from
Marcus Lalero, the late king of Tabukan, whose existence and death are
confirmed by the contract of 1697, stated the allegiance of the people of
"Miangis" towards Tabukan. There exists however only an indirect report
on this visit of December 10(h, 1700, namely a letter dated May 11th, 1701,
and sent by the Governor in Council of the Moluccas at Ternate to the
Governor General and India Council. In this letter, based, no doubt, on
information furnished by the commander of the Larycque, who had reached
Ternate on December 29fh, 1700, the Governor says that the island in ques-
tion is the farthest of the Talauer islands and that its name, correctly spelt,
is not "Meangis", but "Mayages".
These statements as well as the circumstance that all the reports without
any mention of neighbouring islands, speak of a single island, the shape of
which corresponds fairly with that of Palmas (or Miangas), would make it
almost certain that the island in question is in fact Palmas (or Miangas),
unless the nautical observations given in the report mentioned above (4° 49' ;
4° 37'; 5° 9') might point to the Nanusa group, to which the allegiance with
Tabukan would equally apply. These observations, though no doubt
subject to error, would however seem to offer relatively more guarantee of
accuracy than those based on the length of time taken to cover a distance
at sea. mainly relied upon in the Netherlands Memorandum for the location
of the island. Since, however, no other single island in those parts of the
Sea of Celebes seems to exist, and since it is most unlikely that the navigators
would on none of the three visits in November and December have sighted

===== PDFPAGE 36 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDs/u.S.A.) 
863
and mentioned neighbouring islands, there is at least a great probability that
the island visited by the Larycque on December 10fh, 1700, was Palmas
(or Miangas).
The mention of an island "Mearngy", in connection with, but distinct
from the Nanusa, appears again in a document, dated November 1^, 1701,
concerning regulations as to criminal justice (suppression of vendetta and
reservation of capital punishment as an exclusive prerogative of the East
India Company) in the native State of Tabukan, to which the island visited
December 10tb, 1700, was reported to belong. The fact that the regulations
for Tabukan are, by an express provision, declared applicable to the "islands
of Nanusa and Meamgy thereunder included" proves that an island of the
later name was known and deliberately treated as belonging to the vassal
State of Tabukan.
In a report of the Governor of Ternate, dated June 11 Hi, 1706, the island
"Miangas" is mentioned as the norlhernmost of the dependencies of the
native States of Tabukan and Taruria. in connection with "Kakarotang"
(Onrata or Kakarutan on the Brit. ^dm. map), one of the Nanusa, and
explicitly identified with the island first seen by the Larycque on Novem-
ber 2ht, 1700. Finally, another report of the Governor of Ternate, dated
September 12"1, 1726. mentions a decision on the question whether 80
Talauers (inhabitants of the Talauer islands) who had arrived at Taruna
from the island "Meangas off (or) Mejages" were subjects of Taruna or of
Tabukan. This island is expressly identified with that which was visited
in 1700 by the commander of the Larycque.
This documentary evidence, taken together with the fact that no island
called Miangas or bearing a similar name other than Palmas (or Miangas)
seems to exist north of the Talautse (Sangi) and Talauer Isles, leads to the
conclusion that the island Palmas (or Miangas) was in the early part of the
18th century considered by the Dutch East India Company as a part of
their vassal State of Tabukan. This is the more probable for the reason that
in later times, notably in an official report of 1825, the "far distant island
Melangis" is mentioned again as belonging to Tabukan.
In the documents subsequent to 1825, Miangas (Melangis) appears as a
dependency of Taruna, another of the vassal States in the north of Sangi
(Groot Sangihe), which already in 1726 had claimed the island as its own.
The date and circumstances of this transfer are not known, but it must
have taken place before 1858 ; for a report of the Governor of Menado, dated
December 3\^, 1857. mentions the Nanusa and "Melangis" as parts of
Taruna. 
This state of things has been maintained in the contracts of 1885
and 1899. From the point of view of international law, the transfer from
one to another vassal State is to be considered as a purely domestic affair
of the Netherlands; for their suzerainty over Tabukan and Taruna goes
back far beyond the date of this transfer.
Considering that the contracts of 1676 and 1697 with Tabukan established
in favour of the Dutch East India Company extensive rights of suzerainty
over Tabukan and an exclusive righl of intercourse with that State, and
considering further that at least two characteristic acts of jurisdiction ex-
pressly relating to Miangas. in 1701 and 1726, are reported, whilst no display
of sovereignty by any other Power during the same period is known, it may
be admitied that at least in the first quarter of the 18th century, and prob-
ably also before that time, the Dutch East India Company exercised rights
of suzerainty over Palmas (or Miangas) and that therefore the island was at

===== PDFPAGE 37 =====
864 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/u.S.A.)
that time, in conformity with the international law of the period, under
Netherlands sovereignty.
No evidence has been laid before the Arbitrator from which it would
result that this state of things had already existed in 1648 and had thus been
confirmed by the Treaty of Munster. 
It suffices to refer to what has already
been said as to this Treaty in connection with the title claimed by Spain.
On the one hand, it cannot be invoked as having transformed a slate of
possession into a conventional title inter partes, for the reason that Dutch
possession of the island Palmas (or Miangas) is not proved Lo have existed
at the critical date. On the other hand, it was stated that neither the
Trealy of Miinster nor the Treaty of Utrecht, if they are at all applicable to
the case, could at present be invoked for invalidating the acquisition of
sovereignty over Palmas (or Miangas) obtained by the Dutch at a date
subsequent to 1648. It follows rather from what has been said about the
rights of Netherlands) suzerainty over Tabukan, in the early 18th century,
and as to relations between Tabukan and Palmas (or Miangas), that the
Treaty of Utrecht recognized these rights of suzerainty as comprising the
radja of Tabukan amongst the "potentates, nations,and peoples with whom
the Lords States or members of the East and West India Companies are in
friendship and alliance".
The admission of the existence of territorial sovereignty early in the 18'h
century and the display of such sovereignty in the 19th century and partic-
ularly in 1906, would not lead, as the Netherlands Government appears to
suppose, by analogy with French, Dutch and German civil law. to the con-
clusion that, unless the contrary is proved, there is a presumption for the
existence of sovereignty in the meantime. For the reasons given above, no
presumptions of this kind are to be applied in international arbitrations,
except under express stipulation. 
It remains for the Tribunal to decide
whether or not it is satisfied of the continuous existence of sovereignty, on
the ground of evidence as to its display at more or less long intervals.
There is a considerable gap in the documentary evidence laid before the
Tribunal by the Netherlands Government, as far as concerns not the vassal
State of Tabukan in general, but Palmas (or Miangas) in particular. There
is however no reason to suppose, when the Resident van Delden. in a report
of 1825, mentioned the island "Melangis" as belonging to Tabukan, that
these relations has not existed between 1726 and 1825.
Van Delden's report, as well as later documents relating to the 19th cen-
tury, shows that Miangas was always considered by the Dutch authorities
as belonging to the Sangi and Talauer Isles and as being in a particular
connection with the Nanusa. An extensive report of the Resident of Men-
ado, dated August 12th, 1857, gives detailed statements about the adminis-
trative organisation, including the names of the villages (negorijen) and
districts or presidencies (djoegoeschappen) and the number and title and
names of the native officials. 
The island "Melangis" goes with the Nanusa,
but is distinct from the island "Nanoesa" (usually called Mehampi. after
the chief village) and Karaton; it is administered by one "radja". who at
that time was named Sasoeh. This report leaves no room for doubt as to
the legal situation of Melangis at that period, and is in conformity with the
territorial description given for Palmas (or Miangas) in the contracts of
1885 and 1899 already mentioned, and also with a table, dated Septem-
ber 15th. 1889. showing the whole system of administrative districts in the

===== PDFPAGE 38 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.) 
865
Talauer Islands which are dependencies of the native principalities of the
Sangi Isles.
It would however seem that before 1895 the direct relations between the
island and the colonial administration were very loose. In a report on a
visit paid to the island in November 1895 by the Resident of Menado, it is
stated that, according to the natives, no ship had ever before that time
visited the island, and that no European had ever been there; the Resident
himself was of opinion that he was the first colonial official who went to
Palmas (or Miangas) ; also the commander of H.M.S. Edi, who patrolled
the Celebes Sea in 1898, mentions that "in man's memory a steamer had
never been at Miangas". The documents relating to the time before 1895
are indeed scanty, but they are not entirely lacking. A series of statements
made by certain natives, chiefs and others, mosdy of good age, whose mem-
ories went back far beyond 1906—at least to 1870— have been laid by the
Netherlands Government before the Tribunal, two of them also in the native
language used by the witnesses. It would seem to result from diese deposi-
tions that the people of Miangas used to send yearly presents (pahawoea) to
the radja of Taruna as token of their submission; even details about the
distribution of the tribute to be collected are given. On the other hand the
radja of Taruna was under the obligation to give assistance to the bland in
case of distress. A deposition made by a Dutch civil officer gives the list
of 8 headmen who had been instituted either by the radja of Tabukan
(probably Taruna) or by the Resident of Menado at Miangas until 1917.
Whatever may be the value of such depositions made all since 1924, they
are at least in part supported by documentary evidence. Thus the list of
headmen is confirmed as concerns the nomination of Timpala by a decree
signed on September 15^, 1889, by the Resident of Menado. The most
important fact is however the existence of documentary evidence as to the
taxation of the people of Miangas by the Dutch authorities. Whilst in
earlier times the tribute was paid in mats, rice and other objects, it was, in
conformity with the contract with Taruna of 1885, replaced by a capitation
tax, to be paid in money (one florin for each native man above 18 years).
A table has been produced by the Netherlands Government which contains
for all the dependencies of the Sangi States situated in the Talauer Islands
the number of taxpayers and the amount to be paid. There "Menagasa"
ranks as a part of the "Djoegoeschap" (Presidency) of the Nanusa under the
dependencies of Taruna, with 88 "Hassilplichtigen" (taxpayers), paying
each Fl. 1.—.
It further results from a report of the Contrôleur of Taruna dated
November 17*1», 1896, that the people of "Melangis" paid their tax by selling
products on the larger islands and ihus getting the money with which the
new tax was to be paid. The effective payment of the tax is likewise con-
firmed by the commander of H.M.S. Edi in a report dated June 18th,
1898.
The report of the Contrôleur of Taruna referred to mentions the fact that
on November 4th, 1896, a coat of arms was'handed to the "Kapitein-laoet"
(administrative head) of "Melangis", just as two days before, the same act
had taken place at Karaton (Karatong), an island of the Nanusa. The
report mentions that in both cases the native authorities were informed as to
the meaning of this act. The distribution of coats of arms and flags as signs
of sovereignty is regulated by instructions sanctioned by the Crown in 1843.
The coats of arms placed at Miangas in 1896 were found in good state by
H.M.S. Edi in 1898. The existence of a "vlaggestok" on the island is
55

===== PDFPAGE 39 =====
866 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.)
proved by sketches made in 1895 and 1898 by officers of the Dutch ships
Raaf and Edi.
The orders given, May 13th, 1898, to H.M.S. Edi which was to be
stationed in the seas of North-East Celebes and Ternate leave no doubt that
the task of the said vessel was to patrol these coasts and the Sangi and
Talauer Islands, and, "if necessary, to make respected the rules for the
maintenance of strict neutrality". The log-book of the ship proves that
H.M.S. Edi twice visited Palmas (or Miangas) during the war, in June
and in September 1898.
As regards the 20th century, it is to be observed that events subsequent to
1906 must in any case be ruled out, in accordance both with the general
principles of arbitral procedure between States and with the understanding
arrived at between the Parties in the note of the Department of State,
dated January 25th, 1915, and the note of the Netherlands Minister at
Washington, dated May 29^, 1915. The events falling between the Treaty
of Paris, December 10*, 1898, and the rise of the present dispute in 1906,
cannot in themselves serve to indicate the legal situation of the island at the
critical moment when the cession of the Philippines by Spain took place.
They are however indirectly of a certain interest, owing to the light they
might throw on the period immediately preceding. It is to be noted in the
first place that there is no essential difference between the relations between
the Dutch authorities and the island of Palmas (or Miangas) before and
after the Treaty of Paris. There cannot therefore be any question of ruling
out the events of the period 1899-1906 as possibly being influenced by the
existence of the said Treaty. The contract with Kandahar-Taruna of 1899
runs on the same lines as the preceding contract of 1885 with Taruna, and
was in preparation already before 1898. The system of taxation, as shown
by the table of the years 1904 and 1905, is the same as that instituted in 1895.
The headman Timpala, instituted in 1889, was replaced by a new man only
in 1917.
The assistance given in the island after the typhoon of October 1904,
though in itself not necessarily a display of State functions, was considered
as such—as is shown by the report of the Resident of Menado, dated
December 31st, 1904—that the island "Miangis", which was particularly
damaged, could only get the indispensable help through Government assist-
ance ("van Gouvernementswege"). Reference may also be made to a
relation which seems to have existed already in former times between the
tribute paid by the islanders to the Sangi radjas and the assistance to be
given to them in time of distress by the larger islands with their greater
resources.
V.
The conclusions to be derived from the above examination of the
arguments of the Parties are the following :
The claim of the United States to sovereignty over the Island of Palmas
(or Miangas) is derived from Spain by way of cession under the Treaty of
Paris. The latter Treaty, though it comprises the island in dispute within
the limits of cession, and in spite of the absence of any reserves or protest
by the Netherlands as to these limits, has not created in favour of the United
States any title of sovereignty such as was not already vested in Spain. The

===== PDFPAGE 40 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.) 
867
essential point is therefore to decide whether Spain had sovereignty over
Palmas (or Miangas) at the time of the coming into force of the Treaty of
Paris.
The United States base their claim on the titles of discovery, of recogni-
tion by treaty and of contiguity, i.e. titles relating to acts or circumstances
leading to the acquisition of sovereignty; they have however not established
the fact that sovereignty so acquired was effectively displayed at any time.
The Netherlands on the contrary found their claim to sovereignty essen-
tially on the title of peaceful and continuous display of State authority over
the island. Since this title would in international law prevail over a tide of
acquisition of sovereignty not followed by actual display of State authority,
it is necessary to ascertain in the first place, whether the contention of the
Netherlands is sufficiently established by evidence, and, if so, for what period
of time.
In the opinion of the Arbitrator the Netherlands have succeeded in
establishing the following facts:
a. The Island of Palmas (or Miangas) is identical with an island desig-
nated by this or a similar name, which has formed, at least since 1700, suc-
cessively a part of two of the native States of the Island of Sangi (Talautse
Isles).
b. These native States were from 1677 onwards connected with the East
India Company, and thereby with ihe Netherlands, by contracts of suzer-
ainty, which conferred upon the suzerain such powers as would justify his
considering the vassal State as a part of his territory.
c. Acts characteristic of State authority exercised either by the vassal
State or by the suzerain Power in regard precisely to the Island of Palmas
(or Miangas) have been established as occurring at different epochs between
1700 and 1898, as well as in the period between 1898 and 1906.
The acts of indirect or direct display of Netherlands sovereignty at
Palmas (or Miangas), especially in the 18th and early 19th centuries are not
numerous, and there are considerable gaps in the evidence of continuous
display. But apart from the consideration that the manifestations of sover-
eignty over a small and distant island, inhabited only by natives, cannot
be expected to be frequent, it is not necessary that the display of sovereignty
should go back to a very far distant period. It may suffice that such display
existed in 1898, and had already existed as continuous and peaceful before
that date long enough to enable any Power who might have considered her-
self as possessing sovereignty over the island, or having a claim to sover-
eignty, to have, according to local conditions, a reasonable possibility for
ascertaining the existence of a state of things contrary to her real or alleged
rights.
It is not necessary that the display of sovereignty should be established as
having begun at a precise epoch; it suffices that it had existed at the critical
period preceding the year 1898. It is quite natural that the establishment
of sovereignty may be the outcome of a slow evolution, of a progressive
intensification of State control. This is particularly the case, if sovereignty
is acquired by the establishment of the suzerainty of a colonial Power over
a native State, and in regard to outlying possessions of such a vassal State.
Now the evidence relating to the period after the middle of the 19* cen-
tury makes it clear that the Netherlands Indian Government considered the
island distinctly as a part of its possessions and that, in the years immedi-
ately preceding 1898, an intensification of display of sovereignty took place.

===== PDFPAGE 41 =====
868 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/u.S.A.)
Since the moment when the Spaniards, in withdrawing from the Moluc-
cas in 1666, made express reservations as to the maintenance of their sover-
eign rights, up to the contestation made by the United States in 1906, no
contestation or other action whatever or protest against the exercise of terri-
torial rights by the Netherlands over the Talautse (Sangi) Isles and their
dependencies (Miangas included) has been recorded. The peaceful char-
acter of the display of Netherlands sovereignty for the entire period to which
the evidence concerning acts of display relates (1700-1906) must be admitted.
There is moreover no evidence which would establish any act of display of
sovereignty over the island by Spain or another Power, such as might coun-
ter-balance or annihilate the manifestations of Netherlands sovereignty.
As to third Powers, the evidence submitted to the Tribunal does not disclose
any trace of such action, at least from the middle of the 17*1» century onwards.
These circumstances, together with the absence of any evidence of a conflict
between Spanish and Netherlands authorities during more than two cen-
turies as regards Palmas (or Miangas), are an indirect proof of the exclusive
display of Netherlands sovereignty.
This being so, it remains to be considered first whether the display of State
authority might not be legally defective and therefore unable to create a
valid title of sovereignty, and secondly whether the United States may not
put forward a better title to that of the Netherlands.
As to the conditions of acquisition of sovereignty by way of continuous
and peaceful display of State authority (so-called prescription), some of
which have been discussed in the United States Counter-Memorandum, the
following must be said:
The display has been open and public, that is to say that it was in con-
formity with usages as to exercise of sovereignty over colonial States. A
clandestine exercise of State authority over an inhabited territory during a
considerable length of time would seem to be impossible. An obligation for
the Netherlands to notify to other Powers the establishment of suzerainty
over the Sangi States or of the display of sovereignty in these territories did
not exist.
Such notification, like any other formal act, can only be the condition of
legality as a consequence of an explicit rule of law. A rule of this kind
adopted by the Powers in 1885 for the African continent does not apply de
piano to other regions, and thus the contract with Taruna of 1885, or with
Kandahar-Taruna of 1889, even if they were to be considered as the first
assertions of sovereignty over Palmas (or Miangas) would not be subject to
the rule of notification.
There can further be no doubt that the Netherlands exercised the State
authority over the Sangi States as sovereign in their own right, not under a
derived or precarious title.
Finally it is to be observed that the question whether the establishment of
the Dutch on the Talautse Isles (Sangi) in 1677 was a violation of the
Treaty of Miinster and whether this circumstance might have prevented
the acquisition of sovereignty even by means of prolonged exercise of State
authority, need not be examined, since the Treaty of Utrecht recognized
the state of things existing in 1714 and therefore the suzerain right of the
Netherlands over Tabukan and Miangas.
The conditions of acquisition of sovereignty by the Netherlands are there-
fore to be considered as fulfilled. 
It remains now to be seen whether the
United States as successors of Spain are in a position to bring forward an
equivalent or stronger title. This is to be answered in the negative.

===== PDFPAGE 42 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.) 
869
The title of discovery, if it had not been already disposed of by the Treaties
of Munster and Utrecht would, under the most favourable and most extensive
interpretation, exist only as an inchoate title, as a claim to establish sover-
eignty by effective occupation. An inchoate title however cannot prevail
over a definite title founded on continuous and peaceful display of sover-
eignty.
The title of contiguity, understood as a basis of territorial sovereignty, has
no foundation in international law.
The title of recognition by treaty does not apply, because even if the Sangi
States, with the dependency of Miangas, are to be considered as "held and
possessed" by Spain in 1648, the rights of Spain to be derived from the
Treaty of Munster would have been superseded by those which were acquired
by the Treaty of Utrecht. Now if there is evidence of a state of possession
in 1714 concerning the island of Palmas (or Miangas), such evidence is
exclusively in favour of the Netherlands. But even if the Treaty of Utrecht
could not be taken into consideration, the acquiescence of Spain in the
situation created after 1677 would deprive her and her successors of the
possibility of still invoking conventional rights at the present time.
The Netherlands tide of sovereignty, acquired by continuous and peaceful
display of State authority during a long period of time going probably back
beyond the year 1700, therefore holds good.
The same conclusion would be reached, if, for argument's sake, it were
admitted that the evidence laid before die Tribunal in conformity with the
rules governing the present procedure did not—as it is submitted by the
United States—suffice to establish continuous and peaceful display of sover-
eignty over the Island of Palmas (or Miangas). In this case no Party
would have established its claims to sovereignty over the Island and the
decision of the Arbitrator would have to be founded on the relative strength
of the titles invoked by each Party.
A solution on this ground would be necessary under the Special Agree-
ment. The terms adopted by die Parties in order to determine the point to
be decided by the Arbitrator (Article I) presuppose for the present case that
die Island of Palmas (or Miangas) can belong only either to the United
States or to die Netherlands, and must form in its entirety a part of the
territory either of the one or of the other of these two Powers, Parties to the
dispute. For since, according to the terms of its Preamble, the Agreement
of January 23rd, 1925, has for object to "terminate" the dispute, it is the
evident will of the Parties that the arbitral award shall not conclude by a
"non liquet", but shall in any event decide that the island forms a part of the
territory of one or the other of two litigant Powers.
The possibility for the Arbitrator to found his decision on the reladve
strength of the tides invoked on either side must have been envisaged by the
Parties to the Special Agreement, because it was to be foreseen that the
evidence produced as regards sovereignty over a territory in the circum-
stances of the island in dispute might prove not to be sufficient to lead to a
clear conclusion as to the existence of sovereignty.
For the reasons given above, no presumption in favour of Spanish sov-
ereignty can be based in international law on the titles invoked by the
United States as successors of Spain. Therefore, there would not be suffi-
cient grounds for deciding the case in favour of the United States, even if it

===== PDFPAGE 43 =====
870 
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE 
(NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.)
were admitted, in accordance with their submission, that the evidence
produced by the Netherlands in support of their claim either does not relate
to the Island in dispute or does not suffice to establish a continuous display
of State authority over the island. For, in any case, the exercise of some
acts of State authority and the existence of external signs of sovereignty, e.g.
flags and coat of arms, has been proved by the Netherlands, even if the
Arbitrator were to retain only such evidence as can, in view of the trust-
worthy and sufficiently accurate nautical observations given to support it,
concern solely the island of Palmas (or Miangas), namely that relating to
the visits of the steamer Raaf in 1895, of H.M.S. Edi in 1898 and of
General Wood in 1906.
These facts at least constitute a beginning of establishment of sovereignty
by continuous and peaceful display of State authority, or a commencement
of occupation of an island not yet forming a part of the territory of a State;
and such a state of things would create in favour of the Netherlands an
inchoate title for completing the conditions of sovereignty. Such inchoate
title, based on display of State authority, would, in the opinion of the Ar-
bitrator, prevail over an inchoate title derived from discovery, especially if
this latter title has been left for a very long time without completion by
occupation; and it would equally prevail over any claim which, in equity,
might be deduced from the notion of contiguity. International law, like
law in general, has the object of assuring the coexistence of different interests
which are worthy of legal protection. 
If, as in the present instance, only
one of two conflicting interests is to prevail, because sovereignty can be
attributed to but one of the Parties, the interest which involves the main-
tenance of a state of things having offered at the critical time to the inhabi-
tants of the disputed territory and to other States a certain guarantee for
the respect of their rights ought, in doubt, to prevail over an interest which—
supposing it to be recognized in international law—has not yet received
any concrete form of development.
Supposing that, at the time of the coming into force of the Treaty of
Paris, the Island of Palmas (or Miangas) did not form part of the territory
of any State, Spain would have been able to cede only the rights which she
might possibly derive from discovery or contiguity. On the other hand, the
inchoate title of the Netherlands could not have been modified by a treaty
concluded between third Powers; and such a treaty could not have impressed
the character of illegality on any act undertaken by the Netherlands with a
view to completing their inchoate title—at least as long as no dispute on
the matter had arisen, i.e. until 1906.
Now it appears from the report on the visit of General Wood to Palmas
(or Miangas), on January 216t, 1906, that the establishment of Netherlands
authority, attested also by external signs of sovereignty, had already reached
such a degree of development, that the importance of maintaining this
state of things ought to be considered as prevailing over a claim possibly
based either on discovery in very distant times and unsupported by occu-
pation, or on mere geographical position.
This is the conclusion reached on the ground of the relative strength of
the titles invoked by each Party, and founded exclusively on a limited part
of the evidence concerning the epoch immediately preceding the rise of
the dispute.
This same conclusion must impose itself with still greater force if there be
taken into consideration—as the Arbitrator considers should be done—all
the evidence which tends to show that there were unchallenged acts of

===== PDFPAGE 44 =====
ISLAND OF PALMAS CASE (NETHERLANDS/U.S.A.) 
871
peaceful display of Netherlands sovereignty in the period from 1700 to 1906,
and which—as has been stated above—may be regarded as sufficiently
proving the existence of Netherlands sovereignty.
For these reasons the Arbitrator, in conformity with Article I of the
Special Agreement of January 23rd; [925, decides that: The Island of.Palmas
(or Miangas) forms in its entirety a part of Netherlands territory.
Done at The Hague, this fourth day of April 1928.
MAX HUBER, Arbitrator.
MICHIELS VAN VERDUYNEN, Secretary General.
