INTERNATIONAL COURT O F  JUSTICE 
REPORTS OF JUDGMENTS, 
ADVISORY OPINIONS AND ORDERS 
THE MINQUIERS 
AND ECREHOS CASE 
(FRANCE / UNITED KINGDOM) 
JUDGMENT OF NOVEMBER 17th, 1953 
COUR INTERNATIONALE DE JUSTICE 
RECUEIL DES ARRÊTS, AVIS CONSULTATIFS E T  
ORDONNANCES 
AFFAIRE DES MINQUIERS 
ET DES ÉCRÉHOUS 
(FRANCE / ROYAUME-UNI) 
ARRÊT DU 17 NOVEMBRE 1953 
LEYDE 
l l 
LEYDEN 
SOCIÉTÉ D'ÉDITIONS 
A. W. SIJTHOFF'S 
A. W. SIJTHOFF 
PUBLISHING COMPANY 

This Judgment should be cited as follows : 
"The Minquiers and Ecrelzos case, 
Judgment of Novernber 17th, 1953 : I.C. J. Reports 1953, p. 47." 
Le présent arrêt doit être cité comme suit : 
(( Afaire des Minq~iers et des Écréhous, 
Arrêt du 17 novembre 1953: C. I. J. Recueil 1953, 9. 47. )) 
Sales number 
No de vente : 

INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE 
1953 
November I 7th 
General List : 
No. 17 
YEAK 1953 
November 17th, 1953 
THE MINQUIERS 
AND ECREHOS CASE 
(FRANCE / UNITED KINGDOM) 
Special Agreement.-Problem 
of exclusive sovereignty ouer the two 
groups of islets and rocks.-Status 
of condominium and res nullius 
excluded by the Special Agreement.-Burden 
of proof : each Party 
obliged to prove its tit1e.-Origin 
of the dispute : initial division of 
the territovy, subject in the feudal period to a dual authority, that of 
the Duke of Normandy, King of England, and that of the King of 
France as suzerain.-Severance 
of the feudal 1ink.-Treaties 
of the 
X I I I t h ,  X I V t h  and X V t h  centuries : absence of provisions relating to 
the disputed groups ; 
indications giuing rise to a presumption of posses- 
sion of the Channel Islands as a whole by England.-Decisive 
evidence : 
acts of possession relating to each group. 
Convention of 1839 : settlement relating to fisheries excluding any 
settlement of territorial questions.-Question 
of the critical date with 
regard to the acceptance of evidence. 
Evidence relating to sovereignty over each group.-Fief 
of Ecrelzos 
held of the King of England ; 
evidence from medieual documents.-The 
Minquiers group : jurisdiction exercised by Jersey in the X V I I t h  
century.-Exercise 
of jurisdiction and local administration by Jerse?t 
in relation to the two groups in the X I X t h  and X X t h  centuries.-Eui- 
dence from diplowzatic exchanges.-Absence 
of valid title on the part 
of France. 
JUDGMENT 
Present : Vice-President GUERRERO, Acting President ; Preside~zt 
Sir Arnold MCNAIR ; Judges ALVAREZ, BASDEVANT, 
HACKWORTH, 
WINIARSKI, KLAESTAD, BADAWI, READ, 
Hsu Mo, LEVI CARNEIRO, ARMAND-UGON 
; Depztty- 
Registrar GARNIER-COIGNET. 

48 
MIEQUIERS AND ECREHOS C.4SE (JUDG>IEI;T 
OF I7 XI 53) 
In the Minquiers and Ecrehos case, 
between 
the French Republic, 
represented by 
M.-André Gros, Professor of the Faculties of Law, Legal Adviser 
to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, 
as Agent, 
assisted by : 
M. Jean Bumay, ConseiLLer d'État, 
Rear-Admiral Durand de Saint-Front (Retd.), 
M. Prosper Weil, Professor agrégé of the Law Faculty of Grenoble, 
M. Pierre Duparc, Archivist-Palæographer, Assistant Keeper 
of Archives at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, 
as Expert Advisers, 
and 
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 
represented by : 
Mr. R. S. B. Best, Third Legal Adviser to the Foreign Office, 
as Agent, 
assisted by : 
Sir Lionel Heald, Q.C., M.P., Attorney-General, 
Mr. C. S. Harrison, O.B.E., Attorney-General for the island of 
Jersey, 
Mr. G. G. Fitzmaurice, C.M.G., Legal Adviser of the Foreign 
Office, 
Professor E. C. S. Wade, Downing Professor of the Laws of 
England in the University of Cambridge, 
Mr. D. H. N. Johnson, Assistant Legal Adviser, Foreign Office, 
as Counsel, 
and by : 
Mr. J. D. Lambert, Research Department, Foreign Office, 
as Expert Adviser, 
5 

49 
MIKQUIERS AND ECREHOS CrlSE (JUDGMEKT OF I7 XI 53) 
composed as above, 
delivers the folloze~ing Jztdgwent : 
By a letter dated December 5th, 1951, the British Ambassador 
to the Netherlands transmitted to the Registry on behalf of his 
Government a certified copy of a Special Agreement concluded 
between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland and the Government of the French Republic, 
signed on December q t h ,  1950, the instruments of ratification in 
respect of which were exchanged at Paris on September z4th, 1951. 
Pursuant to Article 33, paragraph 2, of the Rules of Court, the 
French Government was informed of the notification to the Court 
of the Special Agreement, copies of which were, in accordance 
with Article 34, paragraph 2, of the Rules of Court, transmitted 
to the States entitled to appear before the Court and to the Secre- 
tary-General of the United Nations. 
The Preamble and Articles 1 and II of the Special Agreement 
were in the following terms : 
"The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland and the Government of the French Republic ; 
Considering that differences have arisen between them as a result 
of claims by each of them to sovereignty over the islets and rocks in 
the Minquiers and Ecrehos groups ; 
Desiring that these differences should be settled by a decision of 
the International Court of Justice determining their respective rights 
as regards sovereignty over those islets and rocks ; 
Desiring to define the issues to be submitted to the International 
Court of Justice ; 
Have agreed as follows : 
The Court is requested to determine whether the sovereignty over 
the islets and rocks (in so far as they are capable of appropriation) 
of the RIinquiers and Ecrehos groups respectively belongs to the 
United Kingdom or the French Republic. 
\Vithout prejudice to any question as to the burden of proof, the 
Contracting Parties agree, having regard to Article 37 of the Rules 
of Court, that the written proceedings should consist of 
6 

(1) a United Kingdom memorial to be submitted within three 
months of the notification of the present Agreement to the 
Court in pursuance of Article III below ; 
(2) a French counter-memorial to be submitted within three 
months of delivery of the United Kingdom memorial ; 
(3) a United Kingdom reply followed by a French rejoinder to 
be delivered within such times as the Court may order." 
The Pleadings were filed within the time-limits fixed and sub- 
sequently twice extended at the request of the Parties by Orders 
of the Acting President. On March 28th, Igj3, the case became 
ready for hearing. 
Public hearings were held between September 17th and Octo- 
ber 8th, 1953. In the course of these hearings the Court, which was 
presided over by the Vice-President, in accordance with Article 13, 
paragraph 1, of the Rules, heard the Parties who by agreement 
addressed the Court in the order in which they had submitted 
their Pleadings. Sir Lionel Heald, Mr. Fitzmaurice, Professor 
Wade and Mr. Harrison spoke on behalf of the United Kingdom 
Government, and Professor Gros on behalf of the French 
Government. 
At the end of the arguments before the Court, that is on Octo- 
ber 6th and October 8th respectively, the following final Submissions 
were presented by the Parties : 
On behalf of the United Kingdom Government : 
"The Court is asked to declare : 
That the United Kingdom is entitled under international law to 
full and undivided sovereignty over al1 the Islets and Rocks of the 
Minquiers and the Ecréhous groups : 
(1) by reason of having established the existence of an ancient 
title supported throughout by effective possession evidenced 
by acts which manifest a continuous display of sovereignty 
over the groups ; 
alternatively, 
(2) by reason of having established title by long continued 
effective possession alone, such possession being evidenced 
by similar acts." 
On behalf of the French Government : 
"May it please the Court, 
To adjudge and declare : 
(1) that France po~sesses an original title to the islets and rocks 
of the Minquiers group on the one hand and the Ecrehos group 
on the other ; 
7 

51 31INQUIERS AND ECREHOS C.4SE 
( J U D G ~ ~ E N T  
O F  I7 XI 53) 
(2) that France has at al1 times confirmed this original title by 
an effective exercise of her sovereignty to the extent that the 
character of these islets and rocks lent itself to such an exercise ; 
(3) that the United Kingdom has been unable to establish that 
it had effective possession of these islets and rocks at the time of 
the conclusion of the Treaty of Paris of 1259, which made effective 
possession the necessary condition for English sovereignty over the 
various Channel Islands, or at any subsequent period ; 
(4) that by the Convention of August snd, 1839, the United 
Kingdom and France brought into being, between a line three miles 
from low water mark on the island of Jersey and an ad hoc line 
defined in Article I of the Convention, a zone in which fishery of 
every type should be common to the subjects of the two countries ; 
(5) that the islets and rocks of the Minquiers and Ecrehos groups, 
being within the common fishery zone as so defined, were, in 1839, 
subjected by the Parties to a régime of common user for fishery 
purposes, without the territorial sovereignty over these islets and 
rocks being otherwise affected by the said Convention ; 
(6) that the acts performed by each Party on the islets and rocks 
subsequently to August znd, 1839, are consequently not capable 
of being set up against the other Party as manifestations of terri- 
torial sovereignty, with the result that such sovereignty belongs 
to-day to that one of the Parties to whom it belonged before 
Xugust znd, 1839 ; 
(7) that this 'critical date' would still apply even if the con- 
struction put upon the Convention of August snd, 1839, by the 
French Government should be incorrect, since the Government of 
the United Kingdom was not unaware of this interpretation or of 
the possibility it afforded to the Government of the United Kingdom 
and to British subjects to benefit from the institution of a common 
user of the islets and rocks of the two groups for fishery purposes, 
as this resulted, in the mind of the French Government, from 
I-lrticle 3 of the Convention of August znd, 1839 ; 
(8) that, even if the 'critical date' should be fixed at a date 
subsequent to August end, 1839, the acts of possession invoked by 
the Government of the United Kingdom do not satisfy the condi- 
tions required by international law for the acquisition or preserva- 
tion of territorial sovereignty ; 
(9) that, furthermore, France in the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries has performed the acts of sovereignty required, having 
regard to the special character of these islets, and has assumed the 
essential responsibilities inherent in her sovereignty ; 
(IO) that, for these reasons, sovereignty over the islets and rocks 
of the Minquiers group and the Ecrehos group respectively belongs, 
in so far as these islets and rocks are capable of appropriation, to 
the French Republic." 

j 2  
3IISQCIERS A S D  ECREHOS CASE ( J ~ D G ~ I E N T  
OF I7 SI 53) 
The Submissions reproduced above and presented by the United 
Kingdom Government consist of three paragraphs, the last two 
being reasons underlying the first, which must be regarded as the 
final Submission of that Goveroment. The Submissions of the 
French Government consist of ten paragraphs, the first nine being 
reasons leading up to the last, \\-hich must be regarded as the final 
Submission of that Government. 
The Submissions of the Parties should therefore be considered 
to be as follows : 
of the Vnited Kingdom Government, 
"that the United Kingdom is entitled under international law to 
full and undivided sovereignty over al1 the Islets and Rocks of the 
Minquiers and the Ecréhous groups;" 
of the French Government, 
"that, for these reasons, sovereignty over the islets and rocks of 
the Minquiers group and the Ecrehos group respectively belongs, 
in so far as these islets and rocks are capable of appropriation, to 
the French Republic". 
By A4rticle 1 of the Special Agreement, signed on December zgth, 
19j0, the Court is requested 
"to determine whether the sovereignty over the islets and rocks 
(in so far as they are capable of appropriation) of the Minquiers 
and Ecrehos groups respectively belongs to the United Kingdom 
or the French Republic". 
Having thus been requested to decide whether these groups 
belong either to France or to the Cnited Kingdom, the Court has 
to determine which of the Pdrties has produced the more convincing 
proof of title to one or the other of these groups, or to both of 
them. By the formulation of Article 1 the Parties have excluded 
the status of res nullius as well as that of co~zdovuzinium. 
In Article I I  the Parties have stated their agreement as to the 
presentation of the Pleadings "without prejudice to any question as 
to the burden of proof", a question which it is for the Court to 
decide. Having regard to the position of the Parties, both claiming 
sovereignty over the same territory, and in view of the formulation 
of the task of the Court in Article 1, and the terms of Article II, 
the Court is of opinion that each Party has to prove its alleged 
title and the facts upon which it relies. 

By the Special Agreement the Court is requested to determine 
the sovereignty over the islets and rocks in so far as they are 
capable of appropriation. These words must be considered as 
relating to islets and rocks which are physically capable of appro- 
priation. The Court is requested to decide in general to which Party 
sovereignty over each group as a whole belongs, without determin- 
ing in detail the facts relating to the particular units of which the 
groups consist. 
These groups lie between the British Channel Island of Jersey 
and the coast of France and consist each of two or three habitable 
islets, many smaller islets and a great number of rocks. The Ecrehos 
group lies north-east of Jersey, 3.9 sea-miles from that island, 
measured from the rock nearest thereto and permanently above 
water, and 6.6 sea-miles from the coast of France, measured in the 
same way. The Minquiers group lies south of Jersey, 9.8 sea-miles 
therefrom and 16.2 sea-miles from the French mainland,. measured 
in the same way. This group lies 8 sea-miles from the Chausey 
Islands which belong to France. 
Both Parties contend that they have respectively an ancient or 
original title to the Ecrehos and the Minquiers, and that their title 
has always been maintained and was never lost. The present case 
does not therefore present the characteristics of a dispute concern- 
ing the acquisition of sovereignty over terra nzdlius. 
The United Kingdom Government derives the ancient title 
invoked by it from the conquest of England in 1066 by William, 
Duke of Normandy. By this conquest England became united with 
the Duchy of Normandy, including the Channel Islands, and this 
union lasted until 1204 when King Philip Augustus of France drove 
the Anglo-Norman forces out of Continental Normandy. But his 
attempts to occupy also the Islands were not successful, except 
for brief periods when some of them were taken by French forces. 
On this ground the United Kingdom Government submits the view 
that al1 of the Channel Islands, including the Ecrehos and the 
Minquiers, remained, as before, united with England and that this 
situation of fact was placed on a legal basis by subsequent Treatieç 
concluded between the English and French Kings. 
The French Government does not dispute that the Islands of 
Jersey, Guernsey, Aldemey, Sark, Herm and Jethou continued to 
be held by the King of England ; but it denies that the Ecrehoç 
and Minquiers groups were held by him after the dismemberment 
of the Duchy of Normandy in 1204. After that event, these two 
groups were, it is asserted, held by the King of France together 

54 
MISQCIERS ASD ECREHOS C=1SE (JCDG~IEST OF 17 XI 53) 
with some other islands close to the continent, and reference is made 
to the same medieval Treaties as those which are invoked by the 
United Kingdom Government. 
In such circumstances it must be examined whether these 
Treaties, invoked by both Parties, contain anything which might 
throw light upon the status of the Ecrehos and the Minquiers. 
The Treaty of Lambeth of 1217, to which the Parties have 
referred, cannot be said to contain anything which might elucidate 
this question. The Treaty of Paris of 1259, which appears to be 
the principal Treaty on which the Parties rely, enumerates in 
Article 4 al1 the lands which the King of England should hold in 
fee of the King of France in Saintonge beyond the river Charente 
as well as Bordeaux, Bayonne and Gascony and "al1 the land 
which he holds on this side of the sea of England in fee and 
in demesne and the islands, if any there be, which the king of 
england holds which are of the realm of france, and he shall hold 
of us as peer of france and duke of Aquitaine". These terms seem 
to refer to islands which the King of England held as Duke of 
Aquitaine, and not to the Channel Islands. But even assuming 
that these Islands were also included, the article refers in any 
case only to islands, if any there be, which are held by the English 
King. It does not Say which islands were at that time held by 
him. Article 6 enumerates al1 the lands which the King of England 
relinquished "in any part of the Realm of france or in the islands, 
if any are held by us or by our brother or by others in our or their 
behalf". This text refers only to islands, if any, which are held 
by the King of France, without indicating w-hich islands were so 
held. From the text itself of this Treaty nothing can therefore be 
deduced with regard to the status of the Ecrehos and the Min- 
quiers. The Treaty of Calais of 1360 contai~is in Article 6 a clause 
providing that the King of England shall have and hold al1 islands 
which he "now holds". This provision must be considered as 
including those of the Channel Islands which the King held at 
that tirne. But as it is not said which of these Islands were held 
by the English King, it is not possible to draw from this text alone 
any conclusion as to the status of the islets in dispute. The Treaty 
of Troyes of 1420 contains many far-reaching provisions, but it 
cannot be said to provide anything which might throw- light upon 
the present dispute. Common to al1 these Treaties is the fact that 
they did not specify which islands were held by the Kings of 
England and France respectively. The Court would therefore not 
be justified in drawing from them any conclusion as to whether 
the Ecrehos and the Minquiers at the time when these Treaties 
were signed were held either by the English or hy the French King. 
This question depends on facts which cannot be deduced from the 
text of these Treaties. 
There are, however, other documents which provide some 
indication as to the possession of the islets in dispute. 

55 
~IIKQUIERS AXD ECREHOS C-%SE (JUDGMENT OF 17 XI 53) 
By a Charter of January 14th, 1200, King John of England 
granted to one of his Barons, Piers des Préaux, the Islands of 
Jersey, Guernsey and Alderney "to have and to hold of us by 
service of three knights' fees". Three years later, by a Charter 
of 1203, Piers des Préaux granted to the Abbey of Val-Richer 
"the island of Escrehou in entirety", stating that the King of 
England "gave me the islands" (insulas mihi dedit). This shon-s 
that he treated the Ecrehos as an integral part of the fief of the 
Islands which he had received from the King. In an Order from the 
English King of July 5th, 1258, the Sub-Warden of the Islands 
\vas ordered "to guard the islands of Gernere and Geresey, and 
the king's other islands in his keeping". In Letters Patent of the 
English King, dated June 28th, 1360, it uTas provided that the 
"keeper of the islands of Gerneseye, Jereseye, Serk and Aurneye, 
and the other islands adjacent thereto" may have the keeping for 
a further period. The Truce of London of 1471 provided in Article 3 
that the King of France would not make any hostile act against 
the Kingdom of England and other lands specially mentioned, 
including the Islands "of guernsey, Jersey and alderney [andj 
other territories, islands, lands and lordships, which are, or will 
be, held and possessed by the said lord King of england or by his 
subjects". A Papal Bull of January aoth, 1500, transferring the 
Channel Islands from the Diocese of Coutances to the Diocese of 
IVinchester, mentioned "the Islands of Jersey and Guernsey, 
Chausey, Alderney, Herm and Sark", while two commercial 
Treaties of 1606 and 1655 mentioned only Jersey and Guernsey. 
Basing itself on facts such as these, the United Kingdom Govern- 
ment submits the view that the Channel Islands in the Middle 
Ages were considered as an entity, physically distinct from Conti- 
nental Normandy, and that any failure to mention by name any 
particular island in any relevant document, while enumerating 
other Channel islands, does not imply that any such island lay 
outside this entity. Having regard to the above-mentioned docu- 
ments, and particularly to the Charters of 1200 and 1203, and 
in view of the undisputed fact that the whole of Normandy, 
including al1 of the Channel Islands, was held by the English 
King in his capacity as Duke of Normandy from 1066 until 1204, 
there appears to be a strong presumption in favour of this British 
view. If the Ecrehos and Minquiers were never specifically men- 
tioned in such enumerations, this was probably due to their slight 
importance. Even some of the more important Islands, such as 
Sark and Herm, were only occasionally mentioned by name in 
documents of that period, though they were held by the English 
King just as were the three largest Islands. The Court does not, 
however, feel that it can draw from these considerations alone 
any definitive conclusion as to the sovereignty over the Ecrehos 
and the Minquiers, since this question must ultimately depend 
on the evidence which relates directly to the possession of these 
groups. 

56 
MIKQUIERS AND ECREHOS CASE (JUDGMEXT 
OF 17 XI 53) 
The French Government derives the original title invoked by 
it from the fact that the Dukes of Normandy were the vassals of 
the Kings of France, and that the Kings of England after 1066, 
in their capacity as Dukes of Normandy, held the Duchy in fee 
of the French Kings. It is contended that the Channel Islands 
became added to the fiefs of the Duke of Normandy when William 
Longsword in 933 received the Islands in fee of the King of France, 
and that he, as well as his successors, did homage to the French 
Kings for the whole of Normandy, iacluding the Islands. The 
French Government further relies on a Judgment of April &th, 
1202, of the Court of France and contends that King John of 
England was thereby condemned to forfeit al1 the lands which 
he held in fee of the King of France, including the whole of 
Kormandy. On the basis of this historical origin and of the Judg- 
ment of 1202, there is, in the opinion of that Government, a 
presumption in favour of the present French claim to sovereignty 
over the Ecrehos and the Minquiers. 
The United Kingdom Government contends that the feudal title 
of the French Kings in respect of Normandy was only nominal. 
It denies that the Channel Islands were received by the Duke of 
Normandy in fee of the King of France, and that William Long- 
sword or any of his successors ever did homage for the Islands. 
It contests the validity, and even the existence, of the Judgment 
of 1202, and asserts that even if such a Judgment was validly 
pronounced against the English King in his capacity as Duke of 
Normandy, it could not have the alleged consequences. 
These opposite contentions are based on more or less uncertain 
and controversial views as to w-hat was the true situation in this 
remote feudal epoch. For the purpose of deciding the present case 
it is, in the opinion of the Court, not necessary to solve these 
historical controversies. The Court considers it sufficient to state 
as its view that even if the Kings of France did have an original 
feudal title also in respect of the Channel Islands, such a title 
must have lapsed as a consequence of the events of the year 1204 
and following years. Such an alleged original feudal title of the 
Kings of France in respect of the Channel Islands could to-day 
produce no legal effect, unless it had been replaced by another title 
valid according to the law of the time of replacement. It is for 
the French Government to establish that it \vas so replaced. The 
Court will later deal with the evidence which that Government 
has produced with a view to establishing that its alleged original 
title was replaced by effective possession of the islets in dispute. 
With regard to the Judgment of 1202 invoked by France it is 
the opinion of the Court that, whatever view is held as to its 
existence, validity, scope and consequences, it was not executed in 
respect of the Channel Islands, the French Kings having failed to 
obtain possession of these Islands except for brief periods. Even 
if this feudal Judgment, assuming that it was in fact pronounced, 
13 

was intended to produce legal effects at that time, it remained in 
any case inoperative with regard to the Channel Islands. To revive 
its legal force to-day by attributing legal effects to it after an 
interval of more than seven centuries seems to lead far beyond 
any reasonable application of legal considerations. 
The vietv is expressed by the French Government that the 
dismemberment of the Duchy of Normandy, which in fact occurred 
in 1204 tvhen Continental Normandy was occupied by the King of 
France, has legal consequences in the present dispute. I t  is said 
that if the United Kingdom Government is unable to establish 
its claim to the Ecrehos and the Minquiers, the title to these islets 
must be considered as having remained with France since 1204. 
But since that time there has been a further development in the 
territorial position. Many wars and peace settlements between the 
two States succeeded each other during the following centuries. 
The Channel Islands, or some of them, were occupied temporarily 
by French forces during some years immediately following the 
events in 1204, as well as for brief periods in the next two centuries, 
and Continental Normandy was reconquered by the English King 
and held by him for a long period in the fifteenth century. In 
such circumstances it is difficult to see why the dismemberment 
of the Duchy of Normandy in 1204 should have the legal conse- 
quences attributed to it by the French Government. What is of 
decisive importance, in the opinion of the Court, is not indirect 
presumptions deduced from events in the Middle Ages, but the 
evidence which relates directly to the possession of the Ecrehos 
and Minquiers groups. 
Before considering this evidence, the Court will examine some 
questions tvhich concern both groups. 
On August znd, 1839, France and the United Kingdom concluded 
a Convention concerning fishery, and particularly the oyster fishery 
between the Island of Jersey and the neighbouring coast of France. 
I t  is common ground between the Parties that this Convention 
did not settle the question of sovereignty over the Ecrehos and 
the Minquiers. But the French Government has submitted conten- 
tions which to a certain extent affect that question. These conten- 
tions, which were modified during the proceedings, were at the 
public hearing on October 8th, 1953, formulated as follows, as 
part of the Submissions presented on behalf of that Government : 
"(4) that by the Convention of August znd, 1839, the United 
Kingdom and France brought into being, between a line three 
miles from low water mark on the island of Jersey and an ad hoc 
line defined in Article I of the Convention, a zone in which fishery 
of every type should be common to the subjects of the two countries ; 
14 

58 
MINQUIERS AND ECREHOS CASE (JUDGMENS 
OF I7 XI 53) 
(5) that the islets and rocks of the Minquiers and Ecrehos groups, 
being within the common fishery zone as so defined, were, in 1839, 
subjected by the Parties to a régime of common user for fishery 
purposes, without the territorial sovereignty over these islets and 
rocks being otherwise affected by the said Convention ; 
(6) that the acts performed by each Party on the islets and rocks 
subsequently to August znd, 1839, are consequently not capable of 
being set up against the other Party as manifestations of terri- 
torial sovereignty, with the result that such sovereignty belongs 
to-day to that one of the Parties to whom it belonged before 
August end, 1839". 
These contentions were based on the first three Articles of the 
Convention, and particularly on Article 3. By Article I an ad hoc 
line is acknowledged by the two Governments "as defining the 
limits between which and the French shore the oyster fishery shall 
be reserved exclusively to french subjects". Article 2 provides that 
"oyster fishery within three miles of the Island of Jersey, calculated 
from lower water mark, shall be reserved exclusively to british 
subjects". Article 3 provides as follows : 
"The oyster fishery outside of the limits within which that 
fishery is exclusively reserved to french and bntish subjects respec- 
tively, as stipulated in the preceding articles, shall be common to 
the subjects of both countries." 
The French Government asserts and the United Kingdom Govern- 
ment denies that the Ecrehos and Minquiers groups are included 
within this agreed common fishery zone, the United Kingdom 
Government basing itself on a provision in Article 9 concerning 
exclusive right of fishery for British subjects within three miles 
from low water mark "along the whole extent of the coasts of 
the British Islands". 
The Court does not consider it necessary, for the purpose of 
deciding the present case, to determine whether the waters of the 
Ecrehos and Minquiers groups are inside or outside the common 
fishery zone established by Article 3. Even if it be held that these 
groups lie within this common fishery zone, the Court cannot admit 
that such an agreed common fishery zone in these waters would 
involve a régime of common user of the land territory of the islets 
and rocks, since the Articles relied on refer to fishery only and not 
to any kind of user of land territory. Nor can the Court admit 
that such an agreed common fishery zone should necessarily have 
the effect of precluding the Parties from relying on subsequent acts 
involving a manifestation of sovereignty in respect of the islets. 
The Parties could have established such a common fishery zone, 
including the waters of the groups, even if these groups had in 
1839 been under the undisputed exclusive sovereignty of one of 
them ; and they could equally have acquired or claimed exclusive 
sovereignty after 1839 and relied upon subsequent acts involving 

the manifestation of sovereignty, notwithstanding such an agreed 
common fishery zone, provided of course that the common fisherg- 
in this zone would not in any way be impaired thereby. The above- 
mentioned contention as to exclusion of acts subsequent to 1839 is, 
moreover, not compatible with the attitude which the French 
Government has taken since that time. It not only claimed 
sovereignty over the Ecrehos in 1886 and over the Minquiers in 
1888, and later, but it has, in order to establish such a sovereignty, 
itself relied on measures taken subsequent to 1839, as referred to 
in its communications to the Foreign Office, dated August zyth, 
1888, and July ~ j t h ,  1903, as well as in the present proceedings. 
Nor can the contention that the Court should determine to which 
Party sovereignty belonged in 1839, be considered as consistent 
with the Special Agreement of 1950, by which the Court is requested 
to determine to which Party sovereignty belongs at present. The 
Court is therefore unable to accept the above-mentioned contentions 
as to the effects of the Convention of 1839 on the question of the 
sovereignty over the Ecrehos and Minquiers groups. 
The Parties have further discussed the question of the selection 
of a "critical date" for allowing evidence in the present case. The 
United Kingdom Government submits that, though the Parties 
have for a long time disagreed as to the sovereignty over the two 
groups, the dispute did not become "crystallized" before the 
conclusion of the Special Agreement of December zgth, 1950, 
and that therefore this date should be considered as the critical 
date, with the result that a l  acts before that date must be taken 
into consideration by the Court. The French Government, on the 
other hand, contends that the date of the Convention of 1839 
should be selected as the critical date, and that al1 subsequent 
acts must be excluded from consideration. 
At the date of the Convention of 1839, no dispute as to the 
sovereignty over the Ecrehos and Minquiers groups had yet arisen. 
The Parties had for a considerable time been in disagreement with 
regard to the exclusive right to fish oysters, but they did not link 
that question to the question of sovereignty over the Ecrehos and 
the Minquiers. In such circumstances there is no reason why the 
conclusion of that Convention should have any effect on the question 
of allowing or ruling out evidence relating to sovereignty. A dispute 
as to sovereignty over the groups did not arise before the years 
1886 and 1888, when France for the first time claimed sovereignty 
over the Ecrehos and the Minquiers respectively. But in view of 
the special circumstances of the present case, subsequent acts 
should also be considered by the Court, unless the measure in 
question was taken with a view to improving the legal position 
of the Party concerned. In many respects activity in regard to 
these groups had developed gradually long before the dispute as 

to sovereignty arose, and it has since continued without inter- 
ruption and in a similar manner. In such circumstances there would 
be no justification for ruling out al1 events which during this 
continurd development occurred after the years 1886 and 1888 
respectively. 
There is also another point concerning both groups which the 
Court will mention before dealing with each group separately. 
The United Kingdom Government has endeavoured to show that 
the groups must be considered as dependencies of Jersey and has 
referred to Article 38 of a Franco-British Fishery Convention of 
1867, which was ratified but not brought into operation. This 
Article provided : 
"The terms 'British Islands' and 'United Kingdom', employed in 
this Convention, shall include the Islands of Jersey, Guernsey, 
Alderney , Sark and Man, with their dependencies." 
The United Kingdom Government has also invoked similar 
clauses in a Franco-British Submarine Telegraph Convention of 
1859 and in a British Sea Fisheries Act of 1843. 
These various clauses indicate that there are islands or islets 
which are dependencies of such Channel Islands as are enumerated ; 
but no evidence is produced showing that it was the intention 
of the contracting Parties to include the Ecrehos and Minquiers 
groups within the terms "British Islands" or "dependencies" or, 
on the other hand, to exclude the groups from these terms. 
The Court will now consider the claims of both Parties t o  
sovereignty over the Ecrehos and begins with the evidence produced 
by the United Kingdom Government. 
It has already been mentioned that the Charter of 1200 of 
the English King, whereby he granted the fief of the Channel 
Islands to Piers des Préaux, and the Charter of 1203, whereby 
the latter in turn granted the Ecrehos to the Abbey of Val- 
Richer, show that the Ecrehos were treated by him as an integral 
part of his fief. 
The grant of the Ecrehos was in frankalmoin. The French 
Government contends that such a grant had the effect of severing 
the feudal link between Piers des Préaux and the Abbey, so that 
the Ecrehos no longer formed a part of the fief of the Channel 
Islands. The view submitted by that Government is that the 
Ecrehos remained subject to the Duke of Normandy through the 
intermediary of the Abbey of Val-Richer, which was situated on 
the French mainland, and that, when the King of France succeeded 
17 

61 IIISQTJIERS -1SD ECREHOS C-1SE (JUDGXEST OF I7 XI j3) 
to the rights of the Duke after the occupation of ContinentaI 
Xormandy in 1204, the Abbey "passed under his protection, as 
did the Ecrehos, whose overlord he became". 
This contention renders it necessary to consider the Charter 
of 1203 more closely. I t  provided the follotving : 
" .... Koverit universitas vestra me divins pietatis intuitu conces- 
sisse & dedisse, & præsenti charta mea confirmasse Deo & ecclesiæ 
sanctæ Mariæ de Valle-Richerii, & monachis ibidem Deo servienti- 
bus, pro salute animæ Johannis illustris regis Angliæ, qui insulas 
mihi dedit, & pro salute animæ meæ, & patris & matris meæ, & 
omnium antecessorum meorum, insulam de Escrehou integre, ad 
ædificandam ibidem basilicam in honore Dei & beatæ Mariæ, ita ut 
divina ibidem celebrentur mysteria singulis diebus, habendam & 
possidendam libere & quiete, plenarie & honorifice, in liberam & 
puram & perpetuam eleemosynam, & quidquid in eadem insula 
poterunt augmentare & ædificare. Item concessi prædictis monachis 
quidquid ab hominibus meis de Gersy, & de Gernesé, & de Aurene, 
eis caritatis intuitu rationabiliter datum fuerit, salvo jure meo." 
[Gallia Christiana, XI, col. 94, No. XXXII (Instrumenta).] 
[Translation] 
" .... Know ye al1 that 1, having regard to the mercy of God, have 
granted and given and by my present charter have confirmed to 
God and to the church of St. Mary of Val-Richer and to the monkç 
there serving God, for the salvation of the sou1 of John, illustrious 
king of England, who gave me the islands, and for the salvation of 
the souls of myself and of my father and mother and of al1 my 
ancestors, the island of Escrehou in entirety, for the building there 
of a church in honour of God and of the blessed Mary, so that the 
divine mysteries be daily celebrated there, to have and possess [it] 
and whatever in the same island they shall be able to increase and 
build, freely and quietly, fully and honourably, in free pure and 
perpetual alms. 1 have further granted to the aforesaid monks 
whatever by my men of Jersey, and of Guernsey, and of Alderney, 
having regard to charity, shall be reasonably given to them, saving 
my right." 
It appears clearly from the Grand Coutumier de Normandie of 
the thirteenth century, chapters XXVIII and XXXII (de Gruchy 
edition, 1881, pp. 90-91 and 98), 
that land held in frankalmoin was 
a tenure, and that such a grant in frankalmoin to an ecclesiastical 
institution did not have the effect of severing feudal ties. The text 
of the first part of Chapter XXXII is as follows: 
[Translation] 
"They are said to hold by alms who hold lands given in pure 
alms to God and his servants, wherein the donors retain nothing 
to themselves or their heirs save only the patronal domain ; and 
they hold from them by alms only, as from patrons. Wone can make 
alms out of any land, save only that which is his own therein. 
Wherefore note that neither the duke, nor barons, nor anyone, ought 
to sustain any detriment if their men make alms of the lands which 
18 

they hold of them ; and their lords shall exercise their justice and 
levy their rights in the lands so put in alms, notu-ithstanding." 
This text shows that the grantor retained the "patronal domain" 
(dominium patronale). According to this ancient Korman custom, 
Piers des Préaux did not by his grant drop out of the feudal chain 
as far as the Ecrehos was concerned. He continued to hold the 
Ecrehos as a part of his fief of the Channel Islands, with the Abbot 
of Val-Richer as his vassal and the King of England as his overlord, 
and the King continued to exercise his justice and levy his rights 
in the land so put in alms. By granting the Ecrehos in frankalmoin 
to the Abbey, Piers des Préaux did not, and could not, alienate 
the island from the fief of the Channel Islands ; it remained a part 
of that fief. 
This view is contested by the French Government on the ground 
that Piers des Préaux had not in the Charter reserved any feudal 
service and that he therefore had not created an? feudal tenure. 
It seems that no such condition for the creation of a "teneure par 
ornosne", or frankalmoin, was required by the aricient Xormari 
custom, as described in the Coutumier. But even assuming that 
a condition or reservation was required, the grant to the Abbey 
did contain such a condition or reservation. As is seen from the 
text of the Charter, the Abbey was to build a church in the Ecrehos 
"so that the divine mysteries be daily celebrated there", and 
when the grant was said to be given "for the salvation of the sou1 
of John, illustrious king of England .... and for the salvation of the 
souls of myself and of my father and mother and al1 my ancestors", 
this could, in view of the custom at that time, only mean that a 
service of prayers was reserved in the Charter. That this must 
also have been the view of the Abbot himself and of his successors 
is seen from the records of certain Quo Warranto proceedings held 
in Jersey in 1309 before the King's itinerant Justices. The Assize 
Rolls show that a chapel had in fact been built in the Ecrehos, and 
that the Prior of that chapel, appearing before the Justices, gave 
evidence that he and his fellow monk, dwelling in the chapel 
throughout the whole year, "always celebrate for the lord the 
King and his progenitors". These records show that the Prior 
himself as well as the Justices called the grant a tefzz~ra. 
Shortly after his grant of 1203 Piers des Préaux forfeited the 
fief of the Channel Islands, which thereupon reverted to the 
English King and were administered by Wardens aypointed by 
that King, except for certain periods in the thirteenth and the 
beginning of the fourteenth century, when the Islands were again 
granted in fee. Up to 1309, there is no indication that any change 
had occurred as to the connection of the Ecrehos with the Channel 
Islands. 
19 

The object of the Quo Warranto proceedings of 1309 mentioned 
above was to enquire into the property and revenue of the English 
King. These proceedings, which were numerous, took the form of 
calling upon perçons to justify their possession of property. The 
Abbot of Val-Richer was summoned before the King's Justices 
to answer regarding a mill and the a&docatio of the Priory of the 
Ecrehos as well as a rent. As the mill was situated in Jersey and 
the rent was payable there, the proceedings in respect of these 
objects do not show anything with regard to the status of the 
Ecrehos. But the question of the advocatio is in a different position. 
Such a right of a patron to presentation to an ecclesiastical office 
was, according to an ancient Korman custom, considered and 
treated as a jus in rem, inherent in the soi1 and inseparable from 
the territory of the fief to which it was attached. (Grand Coutzwnier 
de Normandie, Chapter CXI, de Gruchy edition, p. 259 ; rlfirernens 
et Jugiés d' Eschequiers, published by Génestal and Tardif, 1921, 
p. 7, 5 18.) When therefore the Abbot of Val-Richer was sum- 
moned before the King's Justices in Jersey to answer for this 
advocatio, it must have been on the ground that the Ecrehos, 
to which the advocatio was attached, was witliin the domain of 
the English King. And when the Prior of the Ecrelios appeared 
as the Abbot's attorney in answer to the summons, jurisdiction 
in respect of the Ecrehos was exercised by the Justices, who 
decided that "it is permitted to the said Prior to hold the premissa 
as he holds them as long as it shall please the lord the King". 
The Prior of the Ecrehos became involved in three other legal 
proceedings in Jersey in the years 1323 and 1331. As they concerned 
events which occurred in Jersey, they do not throw any light 
upon the status of the Ecrehos, but they show that there was 
a close relationship between the Ecrehos and Jersey at that time. 
Further evidence of this relationship is given by Letters of Pro- 
tection, which, on August 18th, 1337, shortly before the outbreak 
of the Hundred Years War between England and France, ivere 
granted by the English King to ten Priors of Jersey and Guernsey, 
including the Prior of the Ecrehos, who was described as "Prior 
de Acrehowe de Insula de Iereseye". Such protection was apparently 
accorded to him because the Priory was under the authority 
of the English King. 
In his Charter of 1203 Piers des Préaux "granted to the aforesaid 
monks whatever by my men of Jersey and of Guernsey and of 
Alderney, having regard to charity, shall be reasonably given 
to them, saving my right". That such gifts were in fact given 
to the Priory of the Ecrehos is shown by subsequent documents, 
such as an account of the IVarden of the Channel Islands for 
1328-1329, a list of rents in a fifteenth century rental and in other 
rentals of Jersey showing wheat-rents due by certain Jersey 
parishioners "by cause of Escrehoo" in 1528 and some later 
years. It is explained that these wheat-rents, which formerly 
20 

were due to the Priory, had been appropriated by the English 
King as a result of confiscatory measures taken against "alien 
priories". Both Parties have endeavoured to draw from this fact 
conclusions as to the status of the Ecrehos. The French Government 
contends that the confiscation of the Ecrehos rents can only be 
ascribed to the fact that the Priory mias regarded as foreign ; it 
was the result of measures taken against "alien priories". The 
United Kingdom Government asserts that this term meant priories 
established on English soi1 whose motl-ier church was situated 
on foreign territory. The Court cannot find that the Parties have 
justified their respective contentions in this regard. I t  appears 
that it was as a result of these confiscatorv measures that the 
Priory, having lost its means of subsistence, some time later was 
abandoned and the chape1 fell into ruins. The close relationship 
between the Ecrehos and Jersey ceased and for a considerable 
period thereafter the islets were only occasionally visited by 
Jerseymen for the purpose of fishing and collecting seaweed. 
In 1706 fishermen from Jersey proceeding to the Ecrehos came 
across a Frenchman there who had just fled from police prosecution 
in France, and at his request they brought him to Jersey, where 
he was examined by the authorities. The United Kingdom Govern- 
ment has relied on this examination, but it cannot be considered 
as an exercise of jurisdiction in respect of the Ecrehos. I t  was 
a measure which would naturally have been taken against any 
fiigitive arriving in Jersey who was a national of another State. 
In 1754 plague broke out at Rouen and, as a sanitary measure, 
the States of Jersey issued an Act providing inter alia: 
"Qu'aucun Vaisseau ou Bateau venant du Royaume de France 
ne sera souffert à entrer dans aucun Havre, ni mettre à Terre Aucun 
Passagers ou Marchandises en aucun Endroit de cette Isle, pareille 
Deffence etant faite à l'egard des Iles & Rochers de Chauzé, Marqués, 
.& Icrehots, ou Rochers adjacents." 
Both Parties have invoked this Act, but its text is ambiguous. 
It may signify a ban on traffic from France to these islands and 
rocks, thereby involving a manifestation of authority in respect 
lof them. But the text may also mean that traffic to Jersey from 
France, as well as from these islands and rocks is forbidden, as 
in a previous prohibition in 1720. The prohibition could then be 
explained by the fact that it was impossible to create a sanitary 
barrier round the Minquiers and the Ecrehos, and that therefore 
it became necessary to defend Jersey against the dangers of 
infection spreading from these islets. But even if this were the 
case, it would not follow that these islets were regarded as foreign 
territory. 
From the beginning of the nineteenth century the connection 
between the Ecrehos and Jersey became closer again because of 

the growing importance of the oyster fishery in the waters sur- 
rounding the islets, and Jersey authorities took, during the sub- 
sequent period, action in many ways in respect of the islets. Of 
the manifold facts invoked by the United Kingdom Government, 
the Court attaches, in particular, probative value to the acts 
which relate to the exercise of jurisdiction and local administration 
and to legislation. 
In 1826 criminal proceedings were instituted before the Royal 
Court of Jersey against a Jerseyman for having shot at a person on 
the Ecrehos. Similar judicial proceedings in Jersey in respect of 
criminal offences committed on the Ecrehos took place in 1881,1883, 
1891,1913 and 1921. On the evidence produced the Court is satisfied 
that the Courts of Jersey, in criminal cases such as these, have no 
jurisdiction in the matter of a criminal offence committed outside 
the Bailiwick of Jersey, even though the offence be committed by 
a British subject resident in Jersey, and that Jersey authorities 
took action in these cases because the Ecrehos were considered to 
be within the Bailiwick. These facts show therefore that Jersey 
courts have exercised criminal jurisdiction in respect of the Ecrehos 
during nearly a hundred years. 
Evidence produced shows that the law of Jersey has for centuries 
required the holding of an inquest on corpses found within the 
Bailiwick where it was not clear that death was due to natural 
causes. Such inquests on corpses found at the Ecrehos were held 
in 1859, 1917 and 1948 and are additional evidence of the exercise 
of jurisdiction in respect of these islets. 
Since about 1820, and probably earlier, perçons from Jersey have 
erected and maintained some habitable houses or huts on the islets 
of the Ecrehos, where they have stayed during the fishing season. 
Some of these houses or huts have, for the purpose of parochial 
rates, been included in the records of the Parish of St. Martin in 
Jersey, which have been kept since 1889, and they have been 
assessed for the levying of local taxes. Rating schedules for 1889 
and 1950 were produced in evidence. 
A register of fishing boats for the port of Jersey shows that the 
fishing boat belonging to a Jersey fisherman, who lived permanently 
on an islet of the Ecrehos for more than forty years, was entered 
in that register in 1872, the port or place of the boat being indicated 
as "Ecrehos Rocks", and that the licence of that boat was cancelled 
in 1882. According to a letter of June, 1876, from the Principal 
Customs Officer of Jersey, an officia1 of that Island visited occa- 
sionally the Ecrehos for the purpose of endorsing the licence of that 
boat. 
It is established that contracts of sale relating to real property 
on the Ecrehos islets have been passed before the competent 
authorities of Jersey and registered in the public registry of deeds 
of that island. Examples of such registration of contracts are 
produced for 1863, 1881, 1884 and some later years. 

In 1884, a custom-house was established in the Ecrehos by 
Jersey customs authorities. The islets have been included by Jersey 
authorities within the scope of their census enumerations, and in 
1901 an official enumerator visited the islets for the purpose of 
taking the census. 
These various facts show that Jersey authorities have in several 
ways exercised ordinary local administration in respect of the 
Ecrehos during a long period of time. 
By a British Treasury Warrant of 1375, constituting Jersey as a 
Port of the Channel Islands, the "Ecrehou Rocks" were included 
within the limits of that port. This legislative Act was a clear 
manifestation of British sovereignty over the Ecrehos at a time 
when a dispute as to such sovereignty had not yet arisen. The 
French Government protested in 1376 on the ground that this Act 
derogated from the Fishery Convention of 1839. But this protest 
could not deprive the Act of its character as a manifestation of 
sovereignty. 
Of other facts ~vhich throw light upon the dispute, it should be 
mentioned that Jersey authorities have made periodical official 
visits to the Ecrehos since 1885, and that they have carried out 
various works and constructions there, such as a slipway in 1895, 
a signal post in 1910 and the placing of a mooring buoy in 1939. 
The French Government, in addition to the alleged original 
feudal title considered above, has invoked the fact that the States of 
Jersey in 1646 prohibited the inhabitants of Jersey from fishing 
without special permission at the Ecrehos and the Chausey Islands, 
and that they restricted visits to the Ecrehos in 1692 because of 
the war between England and France. This shows, it is contended, 
that the Ecrehos were not considered as British territory. But the 
Court does not consider that this is the necessary or natural infer- 
ence to be drawn from these facts. 
In the course of the diplomatic exchanges between the two 
Governments in the beginning of 
the nineteenth century 
concerning fisheries off the coast of Cotentin, the French hmbas- 
sador in London addressed to the Foreign Office a Note, dated 
June ~ z t h ,  
1820, attaching two charts sent from the French Ministry 
of Marine to the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs purporting to 
delimit the areas within which the fishermen of each country were 
entitled to exclusive rights of fishery. In these charts a blue line 
marking territorial waters was drawn dong the coast of the French 
mainland and round the Chausey Islands, which were indicated 
as French, and a red line marking territorial waters was drawn 
round Jersey, Alderney, Sark and the Minquiers, which were 
indicated as British. No line of territorial waters was drawn round 
the Ecrehos group, one part of which was included in the red line 

for Jersey and consequently marked as belonging to Great Britain 
and the other part apparently treated as res nullius. When the 
French Government in 1876 protested against the British Treasury 
Warrant of 1875 and challenged British sovereignty over the 
Ecrehos, it did not itself claim sovereignty, but continued to 
treat the Ecrehos as res nullius. In a letter of March 26th, 1884, 
from the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the French Minister 
of Marine, it was stated that the British Government had not 
ceased to claim the Ecrehos as a dependency to the Channel Islands, 
and it was suggested that French fishermen should be prohibited 
access to the Ecrehos. It does not appear that any such measure 
was taken, and subsequently, in a Note to the Foreign Office of 
December 15th, 1886, the French Government claimed for the 
first time sovereignty over the Ecrehos "à la lumière des nouvelles 
données historiqz~es et géologiques". 
The Court, being now called upon 10 appraise the relative strength 
of the opposing claims to sovereignty over the Ecrehos in the light 
of the facts considered above, finds that the Ecrehos group in the 
beginning of the thirteenth century was considered and treated as 
an integral part of the fief of the Channel Islands wl-iich were held 
by the English King, and that the group continued to be under the 
dominion of that King, who in the beginning of the fourteenth 
century exercised jurisdiction in respect thereof. The Court further 
finds that British authorities during the greater part of the nine- 
teenth century and in the twentieth century have exercised State 
functions in respect of the group. The French Government, on the 
other hand, has not produced evidence showing that it has any 
valid title to the group. In such circumstances it must be con- 
cluded that the sovereignty over the Ecrehos belongs to the United 
Kingdom. 
* 
* 
* 
The Court will now consider the claims of both Parties to sover- 
eignty over the Minqz~iers and begins with the evidence produced 
by the United Kingdom Government. 
The Rolls of the Manorial Court of the fief of Noirmont in Jersey 
contain three entries for the years 1615, 1616 and 1617 concerning 
certain objects sl-iipwrecked at the Minquiers. The first two entries 
state that certain wreckage of a ship, believed to belong to Hon- 
fleur, and lost at the Minquiers, was carried off from the islets by 
certain named persons. The Court, which was held "on this fief", 
ordered the Serjeant to take charge of the objects until other pro- 
vision should have been made. The third entry states that a named 
person is "in default towards the Officers of the Seigneur for having 
taken away an Anchor from the Minquiers and their neighbourhood 
24 

68 
31I'iQUIERS AXD ECREHOS C.1SE 
( J U D G ~ ~ E ' U ' T  
OF I 7  XI j3) 
and carried it to St. Malo". The Court, which again was held "on 
the fief", ordered that certain persons "keep their day at the next 
Court, or answer in the superior Court if the circumstances shall 
require". The United Kingdom Government contends and the 
French Government contests that these entries show that the Min- 
quiers were a part of the fief of Noirmont. 
The Grand Coutz~mier de Normandie, to which the French Govern- 
ment has referred in this connection, deals with wreck in Chapter 
XVII (de Gruchy edition, pp. 48-50) and contains detailed state- 
ments as to custody and ownership. The wreck should be guarded 
and thereafter inspected by the Bailiff or his Officers, whereupon 
it should be given into custody of the lord of the fief or of "preudes 
hommes" and kept during a year and a day in case the owner 
should come forward and claim it. The Coutumier enumerates the 
things to which the Duke of Normandy was erititled and continues : 
"Al1 things other than these shall enure to the lord in whose fief 
the wreck is found." 
The Court inclines to the view that it was on the basis of this 
ancient Norman custom that the P\lanorial Court of Noirmont 
dealt with these two cases of wreck f o u ~ d  at the Minquiers. I t  
dealt with them on behalf of "the lord in whose fief the wreck 
is found", the lord of Noirmont. In the first case it ordered the 
Serjeant to take charge of the wreck, in the second case it declared 
a certain person to be "in default towards the Officers of the 
Seigneur" for having taken away the wreck, and it ordered some 
other persons to "keep their day at the next Court". As the 
jurisdiction of a local Court such as that of a Manor must have 
been strictly territorial and, in cases concerning wreck, limited 
to wreck found within the territory of its jurisdiction, it is difficult 
to explain its dealing with the two cases unless the Minquiers 
were considered to be a part of the fief of Noirmont. 
The United Kingdom Government has further invoked a Judg- 
ment of 1692 of the Royal Court of Jersey in litigation between 
the English King and the guardian of the Seigneur of the fief 
of Samarès in Jersey, concerning goods shipwrecked on the rocks 
of the Minquiers. The Court decided that the goods should be 
shared between the two litigants and the salvors, each taking 
a third, and it based this decision on "certain Letters" of the 
King's Privy Council of 1620 and on an Act of 1632. As these 
documents are not produced, it cannot be seen on what ground 
the Judgment was based. It is therefore not possible to draw 
from this Judgment any conclusion supporting the British claim 
to the Minquiers. 
In 1779 the Jersey Piers and Harbours Cornmittee made an 
order for subsidizing the owner of a boat for the use of his boat 
and for services rendered by him and his crew "who have been 
at the Minquiers for the purpose of helping and saving persons 
2 5 


70 
MISQCIERS AXD ECREHOS C-ISE ( J V D G ~ ~ E X T  
OF 1.7 SI 53) 
The evidence thus produced by the United Kingdom Governmeilt 
shows in the opinion of the Court that the Minquiers in the begiilning 
of the seventeenth century were treated as a part of the fief of 
Noirmont in Jersey, and that British authorities during a consider- 
able part of the nineteenth century and in the twentieth cei1tur.i- 
have exercised State functions in respect of this group. 
The French Government has, in addition to the alleged original 
feudal title, invoked certain facis. It contends that the Biinquiers 
have been a dependency of the Chausey Islands, ~vhich, according 
to the view of that Goverilment, have always belongetl. to France, 
and which in 1022 n-ere granted by the Duke of Sormandy to the 
Abbey of Mont-Saint-Michel. It has referred to a Papal Bull of 
1179 which confirmed this Abbey in al1 its possessions, among 
which the Bull mentioned "totanz i~zsztlam de cause cz~nz pertine~ztiis 
suis". But from this general clause about appurtenances to the 
Chausey Islands no deduction can be made with regard to the 
status of the Minquiers. The United Kingdom Government has, 
on the other hand, contended that the Chausey Islands belonged 
t o  England until about 1764. But the Court does not, for the 
purpose of deciding the present case, consider it necessary to 
determine at what time the Chausey Islands became a French 
possession. 
In 1784 a French national submitted to the French NIinister of 
Marine an application for a concession in respect of the Ninquiers, 
an application which was not granted. The correspondence between 
the French authorities, relating to this matter, does not disclose 
anything which could support the present French claim to sover- 
eignty, but it reveals certain fears of creating difficulties with the 
English Crown. 
In 1831 a French national made a hydrographical survey of the 
Minquiers group ; but a British Naval officer, on instructions from 
the British Admiralty, surveyed both the Minquiers and the Ecrehos 
as early as 1813-1815. 
The French Government further contends that since 1861 it 
has assumed the sole charge of the lighting and buoying of the 
Minquiers for more than 75 years, without having encountered 
any objection from the United Kingdom Government. The buoys 
were placed outside the reefs of the group and purported to aid 
navigation to and from French ports and protect shipping against 
the dangerous reefs of the Minquiers. In 1888 a French mission, 
appointed to make a hydrographic survey of the islets, erected 
provisional beacons on several of them to facilitate the survey. 
The French Government has also relied on the fact that the 
French Prime 3~linister and the Air Mjnister in 1938 travelled to 
the Minquiers in order to inspect the buoying, and that a Frenchman 

71 
MINQUIERS AND ECREHOS CASE (JUDGMENT OF 17 XI 53) 
in 1939 erected a house on one of the islets with a subsidy from 
the Mayor of Granville. It has finally referred to certain recent 
hydro-electric projects for the installation of tidal power plants in 
the Bay of Mont-Saint-Michel and the region of the Minquiers islets. 
The Court does not find that the facts, invoked by the French 
Government, are sufficient to show that France has a valid title 
to the Minquiers. As to the above-mentioned acts from the nine- 
teenth and twentieth centuries in particular, including the buoying 
outside the reefs of the group, such acts can hardly be considered 
as sufficient evidence of the intention of that Government to act 
as sovereign over the islets ; nor are those acts of such a character 
that they can be considered as involving a manifestation of State 
authority in respect of the islets. 
A perusal of the diplomatic exchanges between the two Govern- 
ments from the beginning of the nineteenth century confirms this 
view. By his Note of June ~ z t h ,  1820, to the Foreign Office, 
already referred to above, the French Ambassador in London 
transmitted a letter from the French Minister of Marine of Sep- 
tember 14th, 1819, to the French Foreign Minister, in ~vhich 
the Minquiers were stated to be "possédés par L'Angleterre", and 
in one of the charts enclosed the Minquiers group was indicated 
as being British. It is argued by the French Government that 
this admission cannot be invoked against it, as it \vas made in 
the course of negotiations which did not result in agreement. 
But it was not a proposa1 or a concession made during negotiations, 
but a statement of facts transmitted to the Foreign Office by 
the French Ambassador, who did not express any reservation 
in respect thereof. This statement must therefore be considered 
as evidence of the French officia1 view at that time. When the 
British Embassy in Paris, in a Note of November ~ z t h ,  1869, to 
the French Foreign Minister, had complained about alleged theft 
by French fishermen at the Minquiers and referred to this group 
as "this dependency of the Channel Islands", the French Minister, 
in his reply of March  t th, 1870, refuted the accusation against 
French fishermen, but made no reservation in respect of the 
statement that the Minquiers group was a dependency of the 
Channel Islands. It was not until 1888, that France, in a Note 
of August 27th. for the first time made a claim to sovereignty 
over that group, a claim which appears to have been provoked 
by a visit to the islets of the Jersey Piers and Harbours Committee. 
In 1929 a French national, M. Leroux, commenced the construction 
of a house on one of the islets of the Minquiers in virtue of a lease 
issued by French Government officials. In a Note of July 26th, 
1929, the United Kingdom Government protested and said that 
they "have no doubt that the French Government, in order to 
obviate al1 risk of the occurrence of some untoward incident on 
the spot, will restrain RIonsieur Leroux from proceeding further 
with his building operations". No reply appears to have been 
28 

given by the French Government ; but the construction of the 
house was stopped. That it was stopped at the instigation of that 
Government appears to follow from a Note of October 5th, 1937, 
from the French Ambassador to the Foreign Office, where it was 
stated that "the French Government, moreover, in spite of the 
slight distance between the Minquiers islands and the Chausey 
islands, did not hesitate, a few years ago, to prevent the acquisition 
of land on the Minquiers by French nationals". 
In such circumstances, and having regard to the view expressed 
above with regard to the evidence produced by the United Kingdom 
Government, the Court is of opinion that the sovereignty over 
the Minquiers belongs to the United Kingdom. 
For these reasons, 
unanimously, 
finds that the sovereignty over the islets and rocks of the 
Ecrehos and Minquiers groups, in so far as these islets and rocks 
are capable of appropriation, belongs to the United Kingdom. 
Done in English and French, the English text being autho- 
ritative, at the Peace Palace, The Hague, this seventeenth day of 
November, one thousand nine hundred and fifty-three, in three 
copies, one of which will be placed in the archives of the Court 
and the others will be transmitted to the Government of the 
French Republic and to the Government of the United Kingdom 
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, respectively. 
(Signed) J .  G. GUERRERO, 
Vice-President. 
(Signed) GARNIER-COIGNET, 
Deputy-Registrar. 

73 
MIXQGIERS AKD ECREHOS CASE (JCDGMEKT OF I7 XI 53) 
Judge ALTAREZ declares that he concurs in the conclusions 
reached in the Judgment of the Court but for different reasons. 
In his opinion, it is clear from the ~vritten proceedings and the 
oral arguments that the Parties have attributed excessive impor- 
tance to historic titles and that they have not sufficiently taken 
into account the state of international law or its present tendencies 
in regard to territorial sovereignty. 
He wishes to emphasize that the task of the Court is to resolve 
international disputes by applying, not the traditional or classical 
international law, but that nrhich exists at the present day and 
which is in conformity with the new conditions of international 
life, and to develop this law in a progressive spirit. 
Judges BASDETAKT 
and CXRSEIRO, availing themselves of the 
right conferred on them by Article 57 of the Statute, append to the 
Judgment of the Court statements of their individual opinions. 
(Initialled) J. G. G. 
(Initialled) G.-C. 
