INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE 
PLEADINGS, ORAL ARGUMENTS, DOCUMENTS 
ANTARCTICA CASES 
(UNITED KINGDOM v. ARGENTINA; 
UNITED KINGDOM v. CHILE) 

COUR INTERNATIONALE DE JUSTICE 
MÉMOIRES, PLAIDOIRIES ET DOCUMENTS 
AFFAIRES RELATIVES A 
L'ANTARCTIQUE 
(ROYAUME-UNI C. ARGENTINE ; 
ROYAUME-UNI c. CHILI) 
ORDONNANCES DU 16 MARS 1956: RADIATION DU R ~ L E  

PRINTED IN THE NETHEFZANDS 

PART 1 
APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS 
AND PLEADINGS 
PREMIÈRE PARTIE 
REQUÊTE INTRODUCTIVE D'INSTANCE 
ET PIÈCES DE LA PROCÉDURE ÉCRITE 

SECTION A.-APPLICATIONS 
INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS 
1. APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS AGAINST 
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC 
THE AGENT FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED 
KINGDOM TO THE REGISTRAR OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
COURT OF JUSTICE AT THE HAGUE 
FOREIGN 
OFFICE, 
LONDON, 
S.W.I. 
May, 1955. 
Sir, 
1 have the honour to refer to Article 40 (1) of the Statute of the 
International Court of Justice and Article 32 (2) of the Rules of 
Court and, by direction of Her bfajesty's Principal Secretary of 
State for Foreign Affairs, to submit an Application instituting 
proceedings in the name of the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland against the Republic of Argentina in the 
following case '. 
2. Differences have existed betweeu the Governinents of the 
United Kingdom and of the Republic of Argeutina for a number 
of years, concerning pretensions advanced by the Republic in 1925, 
and at various dates thereafter, to the sovereignty of certain 
Antarctic and sub-Antarctic territories which belong to the United 
Kingdom under prior, long-standing, and well-established legal 
titles, dating from, at latest, the period 1775-1843. The territories 
in dispute between the two countries form part of the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies, consisting of already existing British posses- 
sions, which (following on a long series of analogous enactments- 
see paragraph 13 below) were proclaimed as such and formally 
placed under the administration of the Government of the Colony 
of the Falkland Islands by Royal Letters Patent of July 21, 1908. 
It reçults from the present Application that the United Kingclom Government 
accepts the jurisdiction of the Court in respect of the questions hercby submitted to 
it, and in particular that of the title to sovereignty over the içlands andlandsofthe 
Falkland Islands Dependencies. The present Application does not constituteasuh- 
mission to the jurisdiction of the Court in any other respect, or as regards the title 
to sovereignty over any territory outside the Dependencies. 

9 
APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDIXGS (V j5) 
These Letters Patent, the full test of mhich is set out in Annex I 
(No. I) to the present .4pplication, specified as the principal terri- 
tories included within the Dependencies the territories known as 
South Georgia, the South Orkneys, the South Shetlands and the 
Sandwich Islands, and the temtory known as Graham Land. 
There were also other territories, such as Coats Land. Further 
Letters Patent of March 28, 1917 (Annex 1, No. z), were issued 
for the purpose of clarifying the extent of the Antarctic mainland 
together with its coastil archipelagos which were comprised within 
the designation "territory of Graham Land" used in the carlier 
Letters Patent. Under the supplemental Letters Patent of 1917, the 
Dependencies were finally defined to include- 
"ail islands and territories whatsoe\.er 6etween the zotli degree 
of West longitude and the goth degree of West longitude wliich 
are situated soutli of the 50th parallel of South latitude ; and al1 
islands and territories whatsoever betaeen the joth degree \Yest 
longitude and the 80th degree of \Vest longitude \vhich are situated 
south of the 58th parallel of South latitude". 
The territories of the Dependeiicies, as so defined in the Letters 
Patent of 1908 and 1917, Jvhich had long been British possessions, 
have for many years been utilised and administered by the li?lkland 
Islands Governnient effectively, openly and, until nioclcrn times, 
without any objection from the Republic of Argentina, which facts 
are conclusively shown in paragraphs 6 to 2 j below *. 
3. Notwithstanding the United Kingdom's open assumptioii, 
and long-standing and peaceful exercise of sovereignty over the 
territories concerned, and the clear and precise delimitation of the 
Falkland Islands Dependencies in the above-mentioned Letters 
Patent, the Govemment of the Republic of Argentina formulatea 
pretensions in 1925 to the South Orkneys, in 1927 to South Georgia 
as well as to the South Orkneys, and in or about 1937 to al1 the 
territories of the Falkland Islands Dependencies. Subsequently, 
the Republic of Argentina, in a notice of daim deposited on Decep- 
tion Island (South Shetlands) in January, 1942, and in a Note 
addressed to the United Kingdom Govemment on Febmary 15, 
1943, defined her pretensions in the area south of latitude 60' 
South as covering al1 Antarctic lands and dependencies between 
longitudes 25" and 68" 34' West. This westerly limit was later 
extended by a decree of September 2, 1946, to longitude 74' West. 
Thus, the pretensions which Argentina has from time to time 
formulated to territories in the Falkland Islands Dependeiicies 
It wiU be understood that although, for reason of convenience. the territories to 
which the present Application relates s e r e  constituted Dependencies of the Falk- 
land Islands for administrative purposes. the British tilb to them is a scparate and 
independent one. =.hich in no way derives from or depends on the title to the Falk- 
land Islands themselves. 

10 
APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
appear to cover South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands as 
well as the islands and lands sitnated between 25' and 68" 34' West 
and south of latitude 60" South. 
4. South of latitude 60" South, the western limit of Argentina's 
pretensions, as given in the above-mentioned decree of Septemher 2, 
1946, is longitude 74" West : whereas the western limit of the Falk- 
land Islands Dependencies is 6" further to the west at longitude 80" 
West. The United Kingdom's present Application does not, there- 
fore, relate to the areas of the Falkland Islands Dependencies 
between longitudes 74" and 80' West, which lie outside the declared 
limits of Argentina's pretensions. Similarly, the eastern limit of 
Argentina's pretensions, as stated in Argentina's above-mentioned 
notice of claim, and diplomatic Note of Fehruary 15, 1943, is 
longitude 25" West, whereas the eastem limit of the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies is 5" further to the East at longitude 20' 
West. The United Kingdom's present Application does not, 
therefore, relate to the areas of the Falkland Islands Dependencies 
hetween zj" and zoo West, which lie outside the declared limits of 
Argentina's pretensions. It follows that the United Kingdom's 
cornplaint in the present Application relates to the pretensions of 
Argentina to the sovereignty of the islands and lands of the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies which lie between longitudes 25" and 74" 
West and to the southwards of latitude 60' South. A inap depicting 
the territones to which the United Kingdom's present Application 
relates is attached as Annex z. As this map shows, the principal 
terntories in dispute between the United Kingdom and Argentina 
in the present case are the South Sandwich Islands, South Georgia, 
the South Orkneys, South Shetlands, and Graham Land together 
with its coastal archipelagos. There is also Coats Land, to which 
(at Vahsel Bay) the Argentine Government has, during the last 
few weeks, sent an expedition. 
5 .  The main facts relative to the United Kingdom's titles to the 
sovereignty of the Falkland Islands Dependencies and the territories 
cornprised in it, and to the violation of her sovereignty by the 
Repuhlic of Argentina, are set out in paragraphs 6-33 below 3. 
The United Kingdom Government considers that the facts stated in 
the present Application suffice to establish conclusively both the 
United Kingdom's title to sovereignty, and the violation of that 
The description of the origin of the Britisli titles and of their siibsequent con- 
solidation by occupation, user, administration and otlier means appropriate to the 
circumetances of the territories, as contained in paragraphe 6-25 and 30-31 hereof, 
are substantially identical with the corresponding passages in the Application which 
the United Kingdom Government is making concurrently with the present one, 
coniplaining of violations of its sovereignty over the same area, on the part of the 
Republic of Chile. 

sovereignty by the Republic of Argentina. The United Kingdom 
Government reserves the right, however, to amplify in its pleadings 
its exposition of the relevant facts, and to furnish further proof of 
both these matters. 
Origins of the British Titles, Histonc Discoveries and Acts of 
Annexation by British Nationals in the Period 1675-1843 
6. The British title to the temitories concerned goes back to a 
number'of dates varying from, at latest, 1775 to 1843. The first 
discovery of any of the islands or lands of the Falkland Islands 
Dependencies may well have been that of South Georgia in 167j 
by the British merchant Anthony de la Roche. This group of islands 
was rediscovered in 1775 by the great English navigator Captain, 
James Cook, R.N. On January 17 of that year he landed at three 
places on the islaiid, took possession of it formally in the name of 
King George III and called it South Georgia in honour of the King. 
7. Captaiii Cook also discovered the Soz~th Sandwich Islands in 
1775 Sailing east\vards from South Georgia, be sighted first a small 
group of islands which he called the Clerke Rocks after the name 
of his lieutenant, and then, on January 31, a larger group which 
he called the Sandwich Land after the First Lord of the British 
Admiralty of that date. 
S. The Soadh Shetlaizd Islands were discovered by the English 
sea captain \Villiam Smith on February 18, 1819. lzevisiting the 
islands in October of the same year, he landed, planted the British 
flag and formally took possession of the group in the name of 
King George III, calling it New South Britain-(this 
\iras after- 
wards changed to South Shetlands, named after the Shetlands 
Islands, north of Scotland). A feuz months later, Edwards Brans- 
field, R.N., accoinpanicd by William Smith, proceeded again to 
the islands and made a survey of thewhole group. On January 16, 
1820, he landed on the largest islaiid (King George Island) in 
the centre of the group and took possession formally in the name 
of King George 11'. After a voyage south-westwards between the 
South Shetlands and Graham Land, to which further reference 
is made in paragraph 10 below, he retumed to the South Shetland 
Islands. On February 4 he landed on the most easterly island of 
the group, taking possession formally in the King's name and 
calling the island Clarence Island in honour of the Duke of Clarence, 
the brother of the King. 
g. The South Orkney Islands (named after another Scottish 
group) were discovered by the British sealing captain, George 
Powell, on December 6, 1821. On the following day he landed 

12 
APPLICATION INSTITUTIA'G PROCEEDINGS (1' 55) 
on the largest of the islands, took possession of it formally in 
the name of King George IV and called it Coronation Island in 
honour of the King's Coronation. 
IO. Graham Land, the northern extremity of the Antarctic 
continent, \\.as first discovered on January 30, 1820, by E. Brans- 
field, R.N., in the course of the voyage of exploration south- 
westwards from the South Shetlands which was mentioned in 
paragraph 8 above. He sighted, in hazy weather, the outline of 
parts of the Antarctic mainland and one or two coastal islands. 
He named the land Trinity Land in compliment to the Board 
of Trinity House (the British institution responsible for pilotage 
and maritime lights), and he named t\iro of the coastal islands, 
Hope Island and Tower Island, respectively. He also traced the 
outline of the Antarctic mainland and coastal islands, as he had 
seen them, on the chart which he drew of the South Shetlands 
and forwarded to the British Admiralty. Soon afterwards, further 
sightings of the Antarctic peninsula or its coastal islands were 
reported by British and Amencan sealers, by the Russian navigator 
Admiral Bellinghausen, and by the French navigator, Captain 
D'Urville, but the first sighting \\,as that of E. Bransfield, R.N. 
In 1829, Captain H. Foster. R.N., in H.31.S. Chanticleer, effected 
a landing on one of the coastal islands, Hoseason Island off West 
Graham Land, and deposited there a copper cylinder in which 
was a document taking possession in the name of King George IV. 
On February 21, 1832, the British sealiiig captaiii, John Biscoe, 
landed on an island of the Palmer Archipelago, believing it to 
be part of the mainland, and took possession formally in the 
name of King William IV, calling the territory Graham Land, 
by which name the peninsula is knobvn to-day, in honour of 
Sir James Graham, then First, Lord of the British Admiralty. 
On January 6, 1843, Captain J. C. Ross, R.N., commanding 
H.M.S. Evebtls and H.M.S. Terror, penetrated into a gulf on the 
eastern side of the peninsula and landed on a coastal island. He 
named the gulf Erebus and Terror Gulf, and the island James 
Ross Islarid, and took possession of the island together with its 
"contiguous lands" for the British Cro\r?i. 
II. The first discoveries of South Georgia, the South Sandwich 
Islands, the South Orkneys, the South Shetlands. and Graham 
Land were thus al1 made by British nationals-a 
fact reflected 
in the names given to these territories by which they have heen 
known, and have figiired in maps and charts, ever since. The 
same applies to Coats Land, as to which see paragraph 14 below. 
Some discoveries of particular parts of these principal groups of 
temtory were made by explorers or seamen of other nationalities ; 
but the initial discoveries of al1 five principal groups were British. 
There were no Spanish or Argentine discoveries. Furthermore, 
,during this early penod in Antarctic history from 1678 to 1843, 

I 3  
APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
acts of annexation were performed in the name of the British 
Crown at places ashore within al1 the principal groups except the 
South Sandwich Islands, where, frequently, the local conditions 
render landing impossible. On the other hand, during this period 
no acts of annexation were performed in any of the territories. 
concerned on behalf of any otlier State. 
12. The facts stated in paragraphs 6 to II above show that 
from very early dates varying between 1775 and 1843. Great 
Britain possessed, on the basis of discovery, acconipanied by a 
forma1 claim in the name of the British Crown, an original root 
of title to al1 the territories concemed. 
Display of British Sovereignty in or in regard to the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies in the Period 1843 to July 21, 1908 
13. In pursuance of a British Act of Parliament (6 Victoria, 
Chapter 13-British 
and Foreign State Papers, Volume 31, 
page 1211), Royal Letters Patent were issued on June 23, 1843, 
making provision for the government of the "Settlements in the 
Falkland Islands and their Dependencies" (Annes I hereto, No. 3). 
Supplemental Letters Patent were issued on April 28, 1876, making 
further provision for the government of the "Settlements in the 
Falkland Islands and their Dependencies". On February Z j ,  1892, 
fresh Letters Patent were issued by which the Government of 
the "Settlements in the Falkland Islands and their Dependencies" 
was designated as the Governmeiit of a Crown Colony (British 
and Foreign State Papers, Volume 84, page 262). Similarly, the 
Commission issued to the ncw Govemor in November, 1847 
(Annex I hereto, No. 4). and the teil succeeding Commissions to 
Governors issued between that date and 1908, were in the form 
of an appointment covering "the Falkland Islands and their 
Dependencies". Again, numerous laws passed by the Falkland 
Islands Government during the period 1843-July 21, 1908. were 
made for "the Falkland Islands and their Dependencies" 
The 
particular territories coniprised in the "Dependencies of the 
Falkland Islands" were not iiamed in the various Letters Patent, 
Governor's Commissions, or laws of the Falkland Islands Govern- 
ment. The Colonial Office Year Book, however, begaii in 1887 
to specify South Georgia as one of the Dependencies. There had 
bcen comparatively little urhaling and similar activity in the 
Antarctic in the middle of the nineteenth centiiry, but from 1892 
onwards whaiiig, sealing and scientific exploration began to 
revive. This renewed activity called for a corresponding exercise 
of State authority in the Antarctic and led very soon to special 
As regards the nature of the connexion between the Eaiklands Islands and the 
Dependencies, see fwtnote 2 to paragraph 2 above. 

I4 
APPLIC.4TION 
ISSTITUTING I>ROCEEDIXGS (V 55) 
provision being made by Great Britaiii for the government of 
the five principal territories as Dependeiicies of the Falkland 
Islands and to their formal constitution as the 17alklaiid 1sl:~iids 
Dependencies. 
14. The Antarctic revival in the area no\!. 
iii dispute begaii 
with the voyage of four Scottish vessels in 1892 to the easterii 
side of Graham Land and the \lieddeIl Sea for whaling and scaling. 
In the same year a Nonvegian whaling espedition which went 
to the Weddell Sea, called at the South Orkneys, and further 
Nonvegian expeditions in 1893 and 1894 visited the South Shet- 
lands and Graham Land. In 1897 and 1901 respcctively, Belgiaii 
and Swedish scientihc expeditions aent to the South Shetlaiids- 
Graham Land area, and in 1902 they were followed by a Scottish 
scientific expedition under Dr. IV. S. Briice in the S.S. Scotia. 
Dr. Bruce established a meteorological station at Laurie Island 
in the South Orkneys in 1903. the working of which \vas entrusted 
to the Argentine meteorological office in the follo\ving year. He 
spent the Antarctic winter of 1903 at Laurie Island and in 1904, 
after revisiting Laurie Island to land the Argentine nieteorologists, 
he penetrated deep into the Weddell Sea, discovering Coals Land 
(named after a Scottish supporter of the expedition) \vhich is 
now the eastern frontier of the Falkland Islands Dependencies 
on the Antarctic coiitinent. 
15. In 1904 the Norwegian whaling expert, Captain Larsen. 
formed a company in Buenos Aires, the Compania Argentins de 
Pesca, for the purpose of whaling in the Aritarctic and established 
a shore whaling station at South Georgia. In 1905, a Chileaii 
company, the South Georgia Exploration Company, financed by 
British subjects in Chile, was granted a mining and grazing lease 
of South Georgia by the Governor of the Falkland Islands aiid 
proceeded there, only to find Captain Larsen's Compania Argeiitina 
de Pesca already in occupation of the best site for :r base. Mean- 
while, the Captain had applied through the British Legatioii in 
Buenos Aires to the British Government in London for a whaling 
licence for South Georgia. The British Government, lcarning that 
another licence had previously beeii granted by the Govemor, 
despatched H.M.S. Safifiho to South Georgia to investigate the 
situation on the spot. The result aas that a whaling licence was 
granted by the Governor to the Argentine company, and the 
Chilean company then ahandoned its project. In the same year, 
1905, Nonvegian whalers visited South Georgia aiid the South 
Shetlands, taking with them the first whale-factory ship employed 
in the Antarctic. In connexion with this enterprise, the Norwegian 
Government addreçsed an inquiry to the British Governinent 
concerning the sovereignty of territories in the ûrea between 
longitude 35' and 80" West and latitudes 45' and 6jo South, i.e., 

I5 
APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
in the area covering South Georgia, the South Shetlands, the 
South Orkneys and the northeru part of Graham Land. The 
British Government replied that the South Shetlands were not 
international but were British possessions as were also South 
Georgia, the South Orkneys and Graham Land (the South Sand- 
wich Islands lie outside the area of the Nonvegian inquiry) and 
that Nonvegian whalers should apply to the Governor of the 
Falkland Islands for any facilities that they might need. 
16. In view of these developments, the Falkland Islands Govern- 
ment promulgated a whaling ordinance in 1906 (Ordinance No. 3 
of 1906) by which the taking of whates without licence was made 
unlawful, and a royalty was made payable in respect of each urhale 
caught under licence from that Government. It was further consider- 
ed desirable, in view of the iucreasing importance of the five 
principal temtories as whaling and sealing bases, to make specific 
provision for their government and to make more specdïc provision 
for their government as dependencies of the Falkland Islands. 
Accordingly, on July 21, 1908. as recited in paragraph z above, 
South Georgia, the South Orkneys, the South Shetlands, the Sand- 
wich Islands and the territory of Graham Land were by Royal 
Letters Patent formally constituted Dependencies of the Colony 
of the Falkland Islands and placed under its government. Under 
these Letters Patent (Annex I hereto, No. 1) it was provided that :- 
(a) the Governor of the Colony sliould be the Governor also of 
the Dependencies and be invested with the same powers 
of government and legislation in respect of them as he 
should from time to tirne possess in the Colony ; 
(b) the Executive Council of the Colony should act also as the 
Executive Council of the Dependencies ; 
(c) the Governor should have, and be deemed always to have 
had, power by and with the advice and consent of the 
Legislative Council of the Colony, to make laws for the 
peace, order and good government of the Dependencies ; 
(ci) 
the Governor should have, and be deemed al~vays to have 
had, power to make grants and dispositions of land within 
the Dependencies in the name of the Crown. 
The definition of the lands comprised in the Falkland Islands 
Dependencies, as mentioned in paragraph z above, was afterwards 
amended by Letters Patent of March 28,' 1917, so as to include 
explicitly al1 islands and territories situated between longitudes 
zoo and 50" West, and south of latitude 50" South ; and ail islands 
and territories situated between longitudes 50' and 80" West, and 

16 
i\PPLICATION IXSTITUTISG PROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
south of latitude 58" South. The lines of longitude and latitude laid 
down in these Letters Patent as defining the territories comprised 
within the Falkland Islands Dependencies are indicated in red on 
the map exhibited as Annex 2 of this Application 
Display of British Sovereignty in or in Regard to the Dependencies 
in the Period July 21, 1908-September 22, 1938 
17. Great Britain's title to the islands and territories of the 
Dependencies was thus formally confirmed and defined by the 
issue of the Letters Patent of 1908 and 1917, but, as has been shown, 
it did not originate in or depend on these Letters Patent, and had 
been in existence for many decades previously. This title \vas now 
consolidated and maintained by a further effective display and 
exercise of British sovereignty. In pursuance of the authority 
contained in the Letters Patent of 1908, a Falkland Islands Ordi- 
nance was promulgated in that year under which the Governor 
in Council was empowered to declare any law passed for the Colony 
to bc applicable also in the Dependencies so far as niight be appro- 
priate to their circumstances. Under this principal Ordinance 
numerous laws were either made or made applicable to the Depend- 
encies by the Governor in Council, covering inter uliu the adminis- 
tration of civil and criminal justice, mamage, testacy andintestacy, 
&c., and constituting a full and sufficient corpus of laws for those 
temtones, having regard to their particular circumstances. 
18. Especially important are the la\r.s made by the Falkland 
Islands Governnient for xvhaling and sealing, which provide 
convincing proof of the effectiveness of Great Britain's display and 
exercise of sovereignty in the Dependencies. In 1908 the whaIing 
Ordinance of 1906 referred to in paragraph 16 above \vas repealed, 
and replaced by a new Ordinance. This principal whaling Ordinance 
of 1908, as amendcd by later Ordinances, together with the Regula- 
tions made under it, established a detailed and coinprcherisive code 
of whaling law for the Dependencies, as can be seen from the sumrnary 
of the whaling laws in force in the Dependencies in 1920 which 
is contained in the report of an official coinmittee prescnted to the 
British Parliament in that year (Command I'apcr No. 657). The 
relevant extract from this report is annexcd to this Application 
(Annex I hercto, Xo. 5). It sho\\-s that one of the chief objects of the 
legislation \vas the conservation of stocks by regulating the number 
and tonnage of whaling vesscls, the number of whaling licences. 
the number of whales to be taken by each licence-holder, by 
protecting whale calves and by othcr measures. Analogous, if 
j Rcierence is again made to footnote 2 to paragrapli 2. 

I 7  
APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS (V j5) 
somewhat less elaborate, laws were introduced in 1909 for the 
regulation of sealing in the Dependencies. These laws made it 
unlawful to take seals in the Dependencies without a licence, gave 
authority for the issue of licences, and provided for the creation 
of a close season and of seal reserves. 
19. The above-mentioned whaling and sealing laws were actively 
and extensively applied in the Dependencies. For whaling-licence 
purposes, as appears from the summary of laws given in Annex I, 
No. 5, the Dependencies were divided into four units-South 
Georgia, the South Shetlands together with Graham Land, the 
South 01 kneys and South Sandwich Islands. 
(1) In Ihe case of South Geovgia, the Buenos Aires company 
mentioned in paragraph 15 above, the Compania Argentina de 
Pesca, \vas granted a lease of joo acres of land at an annual rent 
of £250 for 21 years from January 1, 1906, and obtained an addi- 
tional lease of land in 1909. Seven other companies, four Norwegian 
and three British, were granted whaling leases betareen 1908 and 
1911 on terms similar to those given to the Argentine company. 
Applications for further leases in South Georgia were refused in 
order to conserve whale stocks. The whaling companies concerned, 
in addition to their leases, were required to take out whaling licences 
for South Georgia which were renewable annually. In 1910 the 
Argentine Company took out, in addition, a sealing licence, and 
after that year South Georgia was divided into four areas for sealing 
purposes, three being let out on licence each year and the fourth 
being left vacant as a seal reserve. An additional place was made 
into a seal reserve in 1918. 
(2) 111 the case of the South Sheflaqtds artd Graha,n Land, a licence 
to take whales in their temtorial waters \\.as granted to a Chilean 
company in 1907, and a similar licence >vas granted in 1908 to a 
Newfoiindland company. By the season of 1912-13, there were 
12 factory ships and 32 catchers of various companies working in 
the South Shetlands arca, al1 holding'licences from the Falkland 
Islands Govemment. In 1912 a Nonvegian company, the Hektor 
Whaling Company, was granted a 21 years' lease of a site on 
Deception Island for a whaling station but, in the absence of other 
suitable sites, the remaining companies operated with factory ships 
moored at Deception Island or, occasionally, at King George Island. 
From that date, whaling companies operated in the temtorial 
waters of the South Shetlands and Graham Land nnder licence 

18 
APPLIC.\TION 
INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS (V jj) 
from the Falkland Islands Government every year without inter- 
ruption, even during the first world war, until 1930, when develop- 
ments in pelagic whaling led them to co~iduct thcir operations on 
the high seas. Activity in these two territories has been practically 
confined to whaling, although one sealirig licence was issued in 1913 
with respect to Graham Land. 
(3) I n  the case of the South Orkneys, the first whaling licence was 
granted in 1908 to the Newfoundland Steam Whaling Company. 
Other companies applied for licences, and in the 1914-rj season 
four Norwegian companies were granted licences. Whaling ceased 
during the remainder of the first norld war, but in 1920 a Nonvegian , 
company, the AIS Tonsberg Hvalfangeri, was granted a lease of 
500 acres on Signy Island for a shore whaling station. A further 
whaling lease for the South Orkneys was granted in 1925 but by 
1930 pelagic whaling had made it ulinecessary for whalers to 
a ions 
conduct their operations in territorial waters, and applic t' 
for licences ceased. One sealing licence was also issucd for the South 
Orkneys in 1913. 
(4) Itz the case oi the Soz~th Sandwich Islands, where access to 
the land is extremely difficult, whaling activity has been less 
frequent. In 1912, six Norwegian companies took out licences 
from the Falkland Islands Governmeiit, and in 1927 the Tonsberg 
Company applied for and obtained a licence. In addition, a sealing 
licence was granted in 1910 for the South Sandwich Islands to 
the Argentine company, the Compania Argentina de Pesca. 
zo. British sovereignty has also been displayed and exercised 
in the Dependencies through magistrates commissioned by the 
Falkland Islands Government. 
(i) As early as 1909, a resident magistrate was sent to South 
Georgia, and there has been a British administration in that group 
coiiti~iuously since that date. Customs and police officers were 
added to the magistrate's staff, and in 1912 a post office was 
established at Grytviken. By 1925, the Government buildings 
included offices, a wireless station and a marine laboratory in 
addition to dwelling houses. 
(ii) The South Shetlalzds and Grahanz L a d ,  as mentioned in 
paragraph 18 above, have been treated as a single unit for the 
purpose of the mhale fishery, a single licence being granted to 
corer both these territories. The whaling compaiiies normally 
made their base first at Deception Island in the South Shetlands. 
If the season was favourable, thcy moved southwards through 

19 
.4PPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
the Bransfield Strait and established a forward base in the Palmer 
Archipelago either in the Melchior Islands or at Port Lockroy. 
But Port Foster at Deception Island is the most convenient 
starting point for operations in the Bransfield Strait and off 
Grahani Land, and it was accordingly made by law a "port of 
entry" for shipping visiting the area. A resident British magistrate 
was sent to Port Foster every summer season from 1910 to 1930. 
and this official exercised jurisdiction over al1 whaling vessels 
operating in the waters either of the South Shetlands or of Graham 
Land and its coastal islands. From 1g12 to 1930 a post office was 
maintained by the magistrate at Port Foster. 
(iii) ,4t the South Orkneys ysvhaling activity waç someivhat less 
frequent than at South Georgia and the South Shetlands, with 
the res~ilt that the visits of British magistrates were correspondingly 
less regular. But in 1913 a Customs Officer spent two months in 
the islands supervising the observance of the whaling laws, while 
a special M'haling Officer spent ahout three months there hoth 
in 1914 and 191j. Xext, the South Georgia magistrate went to 
Signy Island in 1921 to inspect the site which the Tonsberg 
Hvalfangeri Company proposed to lease, and in the following 
year a \ilhaling Officer speiit three months at Signy to eiisure 
that the terms of the lease and the whaling laws were carried 
out by the Company. In the three seasons 1925-26, 192627 
and 1927-28, a Whaling Officer again spent three months in 
the South Orkneys. In 1928 the Govemor of the Falkland Islands 
himself visited Signy Island to inspect the area leased to the 
Tonsberg Hvalfangeri Company. 
(iv) The comparatively slight whaling activity at the almost 
inaccessible Solith Sarzdwich Islands has called for very little 
exercise of administrative authonty at the islands themselves 6. 
21. The cessation of certain facilities and activities after 1930 
came about as follows. The introduction between 1925 and 1930 
of pelagic whaling witli large whale factory ships, enabled the 
\vhaling compaiiies to conduct their operations on the high seas 
without the use of bases ashore or in coastal waters. The result 
was that after 1930 the companies, in order to avoid payment 
of the licence fees imposed by the Falkland Islands Govemment, 
ceased to take out licences for operating from bases in the various 
Dependencies-(licences 
continued to be taken out by the com- 
panies with permanent bases in South Georgia). But, although 
Coats Land (ree paragraphs 14 and 15 above) is also not diçcussed here in any 
furthcr detail only very recent Argentine action having brought this territory into 
question (see paragraph 4 above). 

20 
APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS (v 5j) 
in consequence there was some diminution in the administrative 
activity of the Falkland Islands Government with regard to the 
\vhaiing vessels themselves, British State activity iii the Depend- 
encies continued in full force and without interruption in the 
period between 1930 and the outbreak of the second world war. 
During this period, the Dependencies were exteiisively visited 
and surveyed by the vessels of the Discovery Cornmiltee, an official 
body responsiblc to the Secretary of State for the Colonies. As 
early as 1917, proposals had bern made for a thorough iiivestigation 
into the economic rcsources of the Dependencies, and a Committee 
had been set up to report on the preservation of the whaling 
industry, the possibilitics of developing other industries, and the 
needs of scicntific research. Following the presentation of this 
Committee's report to the Uiiited Kingdom Parliaiiieiit in 1920, 
a permanent Committee known as the Discouery Cornmiltee \vas 
established in 1923 under the direction of the Secretary of State 
for the Colonies. The principal fuiiction of this Committee, under 
its terms of refercnce, was to conduct research into the economic 
resources of the Antarctic aiid sub-Antarctic regions, with special 
reference to the Falkland Islands Dependencies. But its functions 
also included coastal surveys and general scientific research into 
the oceanography, weather and ice conditions and flora and fauna 
of the Antarctic and siib-Antarctic regions. Between 1925 and 
1939 the Committee's research ships, Discovery I (one commission), 
Discouery II (five commissions) and William Scoresby (seven 
commissions) made very extensive investigations of the Depend- 
encies. Numerous voyages among the principal territories of the 
Dependencies were made by these ships on each coinmission, and 
detailed surveys were made of their coasts and coastal waters. 
As a result, the Dependencies during this period were covered 
literally hy a network of patrols undertaken by the Discovery 
Committee. The main focus of the Committee's research was on 
the natural history of whales, the most important economic 
resource of the Ilependencies. and especially intensive obser- 
vations were niade on the mhaling grounds of South Georgia, 
the South Shetlands and Graham Land. But the Committee also 
collected very exteiisive information on the hydrography and 
biology of the Dcpendencies, on the navigation and charting of 
their waters, and on Antarctic ice and ice-navigation. A large 
and important body of scientific material has been published by 
the Comrnittee in the 27 volumes of "Discovery Re;ports", and its 
research on the iiatural Iiistory of whales is admitted by expert 
opinion to have made a vital contribution towards the effective 
solviiig of the international problem of the conservation of whale 
fisheries. 

21 
APPLICATION INSTITUTISG PROCEEDlNGS (V 55) 
22. In addition, a large-scale expedition, the British Graham 
Land Ezpedition, visited the southern parts of the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies in 1934-37 to make land investigations. 
Reaching Deception Island late in 1934, the expedition proceeded 
to Port Lockroy in the Palmer Archipelago in January 1935. 
Shortly afterwards, a base was established and occupied further 
south, and from there various sledge aiid planc journeys were 
made which threw much fresh light on the gcography of the area. 
In February, 1936, the expedition moved still further to the 
south to Marguerite Bay and established a base on the Debenham 
Islands. From there, important sledge journeys were made across 
Graham Land to the east coast and far southwards into King 
George VI Sound. Numerous reconnaissance Aights were carried 
ont, and the expedition ascertained conclusively for the first 
time that Graham Land is attached to the Antarctic mainland. 
23. Other examples of the display of British sovereignty in 
or in regard to the Dependencies during the period July 21, 1908- 
September 22, 1938, are mentioned in the three next succeeding 
paragraphs of this Application dealing with the recognition of 
the British claims hy Norway, Argentina and Chile. Still further 
examples could be citcd. The facts given in paragraphs 16-22 
above and in paragraph 24 below, however, are by themselves 
sufficient to establish conclusively a continuous and peaceful. 
display of British sovereignty in and in regard to the temtones 
of the Dependencies during the period July zr,rgoS-September 22, 
1938, ~vhich is that reviewed in the present section. 
Recognition of the British Claims by Norway, Argentina and Chile 
after the Issue of the Letters Patent of July 21, 1908 
24.-(1) 
The existence of British claiins, not only ta South 
Georgia but to other territories in Antarctic and sub-Antarctic 
regions was known in Norway before the formal constitution of the 
five principal temtories as Dependencies of the Falkland Islands by. 
the Letters Patent of 1908. The Nonvegian Government, as stated 
in paragraph 15 ahove, addressed an enqniry to Great Bntain in 
1905 concerning the sovereignty of the temtories situated betmeen 
35O and 80" West, and was informed in reply that South Georgia, 
the South Orkneys, the South Shetlands and Graham Land were 
British possessions. When Nonvay made a further enquiry in 1907, 
Great Britain reasserted her claim. Norway, neither then nor after 
the issue of the Letters Patent of 1908, made any protest or reserva- 
tion against the assertion and exercise of British sovereignty over 

22 
APPLICATION INSTITUTIKG PROCEEDIKGS (V 5 j) 
the Dependencies. At the same time numerous h'onvegian whaliiig 
companies took out Bntish licences and othenvise complied with 
the laws of the Falkland Islands Government. These facts establisli 
by implication Norway's recognition of British sovereignty over the 
Dependencies in or about 1908. This implicatioii is completely coii- 
firmed by the Nonvegian Proclamation of January 14,1939, in which 
the western boundary of Nonvay's omn Antarctic claiin was defined 
by a line coinciding with the eastern boundary of the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies. It was further expressly stated in the Procla- 
mation that the area named the Falkland Islands Dependencies had 
been brought under Great Britain's dominion in 1908. 
(2) The existence of British claims to at least some of the Depend- 
encies was also weU known in Argeizti~ta before the issue of the 
Letters Patent of 1908. I t  has been mentioned above baragraph 15) 
that as early as 1906 an Argentine company, the Compania Argen- 
tins de Pesca, took out a Bntish lease of land in South Georgia for 
21 years. Indeed, il mas the theiz Direcfor of.4rnzaments of the Argen- 
tine Ministry of Marine wlzo, in kis capacity as technical adviser to the 
company, visited the British Legation in Buenos ilires to apply for 
the lease. In the same year Great Britain, in order to remove any 
possible misconception as to the legal basis on which operation of 
the meteorological station on Laune Island in the South Orkneys 
had been transferred to the Argentine Meteorological Office (see 
paragraph 14 above), addressed a note to the Argentine Govern- 
ment emphasising that the islands were a British possession. This 
reservation of the British sovereignty over the South Orkneys was 
repeated to Argentina in January 1907. Shortly aftenvards, when 
Chie proposed to Argentina the negotiation of a treaty dividing 
between the two countries "the islands and the American Antarctic 
continents", the Argentine Foreign Minister, in rejecting the proposal, 
said expressly that "Chile ought to know that England claimed 
al1 theselands". In 1908, after the issue of the Letters Patent formally 
constituting the Falkland Islands Dependencies, the Argentine 
Foreign Minister asked to be informed of the terms of the British 
"declaration". Accordingly, the British Miiiister in Buenos Aires 
in a note of Febmary 20, 1909, transmitted to the Argentine Foreign 
Minister a copy of the Falkland Islands Gazette containing the text 
of the Letters Patent. The Argentine Foreign Minister replied in a 
note of March 18, 1909 :- 

23 
APPLICATION INSTITUTISG I'ROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
"1 have the pleasure of acknowledging the receipt of your Note 
dated the 20th of February last with which you were good enough 
to fonvard a publication called Falkland Islands Gazette containing 
a Decree bv whicli the 'South Orknevs' are cleclared a de~endencv 
of the '~aikland Islands'. 
While thanking you for this attention, 1 am happy to renew to 
you the assurances of niy high consideration." 
The British Minister, in communicating this reply to the British 
Foreign Office, commented that he concluded from its terms that 
"Argentine Government do not dispute the rights of Great Britain 
over the South Orkneys". A fortiori it is to be concluded from the 
terms of ber reply that in 1909 Argentina did not dispute the British 
title to South Georgia, the South Sandwich Islands, the South Shet- 
lands and Graham Land, which territories wcrc also covered by the 
communication sent to the Argentine Government, but were not 
mentioned in the Argentine reply '. Three years later, negotiations 
were begun for the cession by Great Britain to Argentina, of the 
South Orkneys in return F r  a Legation site in Buenos Aires and on 
conàition of respecting any cxisting British whaling rights. By 1914, 
the final text of a treaty of cession had been agreed betureen the two 
countries but, on a change of Government in Argentina, the new 
Government declined on financial grounds to complete the trans- 
action. The terms of this draft treatv ~rovide further evidence of 
r\rgvntin;~'s recognition of ttic ~ritish'ti'tl~ 
of thc South Urkneyî :tt 
tliis tiiii~.. ~rolwrIh.sla~rdi~io 
the breFi1li.e (11 1/11 rlriznli~ie i~ieldt~voli.~'i~d 
O 
1 
O 
" 
station on Laurie Island. Again, Argentina made no protests or 
reservations against the issue of the British Letters Patent of 1917. 
Nor did she make any protests or reservations against the promul- 
gation of British Law for the Dependencies, nor against the appli- 
cation of those laws to the Argentinecompany, thecompania Argeii- 
tina de Pesca, and to other foreign companies. Nor did she make any 
protests or reservations against the exercise of authority by British 
magistrates in the severai territories of the Falkland Islands Depend- 
encies and, in particular, in the South Orkneys, South Shetlands 
and Graham Land. These facts establish beyond question that 
at this period Argentina recognised British sovcreignty over the 
Dependencies. 
(3) The existence of British claims at least to some of the Depend- 
encies was equaiiy known in Chile, even beforc the issue of the 
Letters Patent of rgo8. Three years earlier, in 1905, a Chilean com- 
pany, as stated in paia&aPh 15 above, applied for a British lease of 
' It seems clear in fact that Argentine intereçt at that datc hardly extended 
beyond the South Orkneys. where the Argentine meteorological station a a s  situated. 

24 
APPLICATION INSTITUTISG PROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
land in South Georgia from the Falkland Islands Government. In 
1907, another Chilean company, the Sociedad Ballenera de Rlagal- 
lanes of Punta Arenas, took ont a British whaling licence of the 
South Shetlands and Graham Land. In the same year, when Chile 
invited Argentina ta negotiate a division of "the islands and Ameri- 
can Antarctic continents", she was expressly warned by Argentina 
that "England claimed aU these lands". Neither theii nor after the 
issue of the Letters Patent of 1908 or of 1917 did Chile make any 
protest or reservation against the assertion and exercise of British 
sovereignty over the Dependencies. She inaintained a Consular 
Officer in the Falkland Islands, but at no time did she make any 
representations either to the Government of Great Britain or to the 
Falkland Islands Government in regard to the Letters Patent, or to 
the promulgation of British laws for the Dependencies, or to the 
application of those laws to the Chilean company, the Sociedad 
Ballenera de Rfagallanes, and ta other foreign companies. Nor did 
she make any protests or reservations against the exercise of author- 
ity by British magistrates in the several territories of the Falk- 
land Islands Dependencies and, in particular, in the South Shet- 
lands and Graham Land. Al1 these facts establish beyond question 
that at this period Chile recognised British sovereignty over the 
Dependencies. 
25. The facts recited in the three inimediately preceding sub- 
paragraphs show conclnsively that, during the years at the begin- 
ning of the present century, when Great Britain was confirming and 
consolidating her ancient titles to the Dependencies, Norway, the 
State principaiiy interested in Antarctic whaling, and Argentine and 
Chile, made no reservations in regard to Great Bntain's display and 
exercise of State activity in those territories. They further show that 
these three States in fact recognised Great Britain's sovereignty over 
the Dependencies. Nor did any other State during this period make 
any reservations or enter any protests against the British claims. 
Origin and Development of Argentina's Pretensions to the Islands 
and Lands of the Falkland Islands Dependencies and Attempted 
Usurpation of British Sovereignty over these Territories 
26. Argentina, as related in paragraph 24 (2) above, was left in 
no doubt by Great Britain that the transfert0 the ArgentineMeteor- 
ological Office in 1903 of the meteorological station previously 
establis-d 
on Laurie Island in the South Orkneys by a British 
expedition did not also involve the transfer ta Argentina of the 

2s 
APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
I 
sovereignty either of the South Orkneys group or of Laurie Island 
itself. Argentina, as was also related in paragraph 24 (z), was fully 
aware in 1908 of the British claims to the several territories of the 
Falkland Islands Dependencies, and dunng the first part of the 
present century sliowed by her acts that she recognised Great Bri- 
tain's sovereignty. 
27. Rotwithstandiiig this, the Argentine Governinent in 1925 
embarked upon a course of action hy which it has progressively, and 
it woiild seem deliberately, sought to encroach upon the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies, with a view to ousting the British Croir-n 
from its sovereignty, and to replacing it by a pretended Argentine 
sovereignty. In that year, on the crection by Argentina of a wirclcss 
station at the observatory on Laurie Island, a Note was addressed 
to the Argentine Government drawing its attention to the fact that 
under the relevant International Telegraph Conventions, the cal1 
sign would have to be applied for through the British Government. 
The Argentine Govemment replied that, with regard to wireless 
stations constructed on Argentine territory, it would act in accord- 
ance with the Conventions. In view of the eqnivocal nature of this 
reply, a further Note was addressed to the .4rgentine Government 
on April 14, 1926, emphasising Great Britain's undoubted rights to 
the sovereignty of the islands and pointing out the absence of any 
previous notice of claim on the part of Argentina. No answcr was 
returned by Argentina and, on the wireless station being put into 
operation in 1927 without reference to the British Government. the 
latter leamed from the International Telegraph Bureau at Berne 
that the cal1 signal had heen applied for by Argentina in terms 
implying an assumption of Argentine sovereignty over the South 
Orkneys. Great Britain having objected to this action in a Note 
of September 8, 1927, Argentina replied in a Note of January zo, 
1928, that she herself laid claim to the South Orkneys on the ground, 
apart from pretended "inatienable rights", of an aiieged first occu- 
pation constantly maintained. (This may be contrasted with the 
-4rgentine attitude about the South Orkneys in 1909, described in 
paragraph 24 (2) above-and 
as regards the pretended Argentine 
"first occupation", see paragraph 14 above.) At the saine tirne, how- 
ever, the Argentine Government in an accompanying memorandum 
showed itself conscious of the weakness of its position by suggesting 
the reopening of the negotiations for the exchange of the islands 
against the grant of a Legation site in Buenos Aires (see paragraph 
24 (2) above). Bleanwhile, the ,Argentine Government in 1927 had 
also represented to the International Postal Bureau at Berne that 
Argentine territorial jurisdiction extended de jure and de facto over 
both the South Orkneys and Sozith Georgia. On this statement being 
contested by Great Bntain in an aide-mémoire of December 17. 

26 
APPL.ICATIOS ISSTITUTISG PROCEEDINGS (V jj) 
1927, the .Argentine Governnient replied that, as regards the South 
Orkneys, it formaily reaffirmed its previous claim. Accordingly, 
Grcat Britain took steps in 1928 to notify the International Postal 
Bureau that bath the South Orkneys and South Georgia rvere 
included in the Falkland Islands Dependencies and were represented 
in Postal Union matters by thc British Postmaster-General. 
28. On June r, 1937. the Argentine Ambasador iii London drew 
the attention of the Foreign Office to a statement by the British 
Minister of Agriculture aiid Fisheries at the inaugural session of the 
\Vhaling Conference, to the effect that the Dependencies were 
under the jurisdictioii of the Falkland Islands Govcrnnient, and 
he reserved the rights claimed by Argcntina over them. The Ambas- 
saclor's démarche was the first intimation of an Argentine claim not 
mcrely to South Georgia and the South Orkneys but to al1 the 
territories oj tlte Falkla>td Islalids Defiei~dencies. The progressive 
and deliberate character of the Argentine invasion of British 
rights in thus evident. The British Foreign Secretary, while joining 
in an agreed statement that tlie character and purpose of the Whaling 
Coiiference had nothing to do nith questions of jurisdiction, made 
an express declaration that the Argentine reservation could not 
in any way affect British rights to the Falkland Islaiids Dependeii- 
cies. That .4rgentina had now enlarged her pretensioiis to include 
al1 the Dependencies was, however, confirmed by an express reserva- 
tion ta that effect on September 22, 1938, made by the Argentine 
I'resident when promulgating Argentina's ratification of the varioiis 
postal conventions concluded at Cairo on Rfarch 20, 1934, which 
the United Kingdom had signed on behalf of the Falkland Islands 
and their Dependencies. 
Rejection of the Argentine Pretensions by the United Kingdom and 
Continued Display of British Sovereignty up to the Present Time 
29. The methods (of which some account has jiist bceii given) 
by which Argentina sought between 192j and 1938 to advance 
pretensions to the sovereigiity of the Falkland Islands Dependencies 
were not those to be expected of a State already having sovereignty, 
aiid relying upon prior and well-established legal titles. They were 
rather those of a State seeking gradually to manreiivre another 
State out of its possession and rights. Instead of actively displaying 

27 
APPLlCATlOW IXSTlTUTlXG PROCEEDlNGS (Y 55) 
and exercising its authority in and in regard to the territories of the 
Dependencies in accordance with their circumstances, the Argentine 
Government merely attempted by diplomatic moves to throw 
doubt upon the existing British titles. Thus, in the first quarter 
of thc preseiit ceiitury, when the territorial waters of the Depend- 
encies were the base of operations of several whaliiig companies 
of different iiationalities, Argentina took no measures (as a prudent 
sovereigtz would have done, or sought to do) to regulate these activi- 
ties, or to conserve the stocks of the principal economic resource 
of the territories concerned. Nor in 1927. although she was a Rlember 
of the League of Nations and had recently formulated pretensioiis 
to the South Orkneys and South Georgia, did Argentina take any 
part in the 14'haling Conference convened at Geneva in that year 
under the auspices of the League, which, if she had had sovereignty 
over these territories, she might be expected to have done. Xor 
did she voice any objection to the fact that the United Kingdom 
took a leading part in that conference in its capacity as the Stnte 
responsible for the regulation of whaling in the Falkland Islands 
Dependencies. It was only in 1937 that Argentina first participated 
in an international whaling conference and contested the United 
Kingdom's right to represent the \vhaling iiiterests of the Depend- 
encies. During the whole period up to 1938 Argentine interests 
in the Dependencies consisted in actual practice of a meteorological 
station in the South Orkneys, taken over (but not on a basis of 
sovereignty) by the permission and at thc invitation of the British 
Governinent (see paragraphs 14 and 24 (2) above), and an Argentine 
whaling Company operating in South Georgia continuously under 
leases and licences issued by the British Crown as sovereign of the 
Depeiidencies (see paragraphs 15 and 19 (1) above). On the other 
hand, Great Britain during this period, as related in paragraphs 
13-25 above, displayed and exercised lier authority in and in regard 
to the Dependencies according to their circumstances. During 
al1 this period, up to 1938, Great Britain alone undertook the respon- 
sibilities of sovereignty and performed the functions of a State in 
and in regard to the several territories of the Dependencies. It 
is not, therefore, to be wondered at that. as indicated above, the 
British Government rejected ail Argentina's pretensions to the 
territories of the Dependencies and continued to assert its own 
titles to them. 
30. After the outbreak of the second world war, in 1939, the 
United Kingdom Government was occupied in the North and 
South Atlantic in dealing with attacks by Axis naval forces on 
Allied and Neiitral sea-borne trade ; and in March, 1941. dispatched 

28 
APPLICATION IXSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
H.M.S. Queen of Bermuda to the South Shetlands to destroy oil 
tanks and stocks of oil left on Deception Island by the Hektor 
Whaling Company, one of the companies holding a lease of land on 
that island from the British Crown. This measure, xvhich tvas taken 
to deny the use of the oil tanks and fuel stocks to Axis raiders, 
constituted a most significant display and exercise of British 
sovereignty over the South Shetlands. In January, 1943. another 
British warship, H.M.S. Carnarvon Castle, was dispatchetl to the 
South Orkneys and South Shetlands, to examine the anchorages 
in those temtories for any signs of use by enemy raiders, and to 
investigate Press reports of purported acts of sovereignty at Decep- 
tion Island by the Argentine naval transport Primero de Alayo. 
H.M.S. Cartzarvon Castle landed a party at Deception Island in the 
South Shetlands on January 8, and there obliterated from the walls 
of the Hektor IVhaling Company's factory the national colours of 
Argentina, ahich appeared to have been painted on them recently 
by the Primero de Mayo. and also removed the Argentine notice 
of claim mentioned in paragraph 3 above. A m i t  was at the same 
time affixed to the building proclaiming that the company's lease 
had lapsed and that the building was the property of the British 
Government. The warship theii proceeded to the South Orkneys, 
and on February 8 landed a party on Signy Island, which erected 
flagstaffs carrying the Union Jack. The following day the vesse1 
called at the meteorological station on Laurie Island and exchanged 
courtesies with the Argentine staff. Aieanwhile the Argentine Govem- 
ment was notified of the visit of H.M.S. Cavnarvon Caslle to Decep- 
tion Island, and was' informed that the United Kingdom Govem- 
ment had no intention of allowing the British title to the island 
to be usurped by Argentina. Soon afterwards the Primero de Mayo 
was reported to be departing again for the Falkland Islands Depend- 
encies, and to have two Chilean naval officers on board. The 
Republic of Chie having also formulated pretensions to the South 
Shetlands and Graham Land, the British Ambassador in Santiago 
made representations to the Chilean Government in regard to 
these officers. He was informed that they were sailing in the Argen- 
tine ship merely as observers, and that the Chilean Government had 
itself protested against Argentine attempts to establish a claim to 
Deception Island 
a It will be abserved that both these States had now started to lay daim to the 
same British tenitories (see separate Application respecting Chile)-a circumstance 
that can hardly fail to reflect adversely both on the motives and the validity of 
both sets of claims. 

29 
APPI.ICATIOS INSTITUTIXG PHOCEEDINGS (Y jj) 
31. The tinited I<ingdom Government, in view of the appareiir 
intention of Argentins and Chile to disregard British territorial 
rights iii the South Orkneys, South Shetlands aiid Grahaiii Land, 
dispatched H.M.S. Williant Scoresby and S.S. l'itzroy 
to those 
territories nt thi: encl of Jaiiuary, 1944. These ships visited the 
mainland niitl coastal islands of Graham Laiid, Deceptioii Islaiid 
in the Soiith Shetlancls, and Signy Island iii the South Orkneys. 
A permanent shore base \vas established at Deccptioii Island and 
another at Port Taockroy in the Palmer Archipelago off the west 
coast of Graham Land, meteorological statioiis heiiig attached tu 
both bases. Furtlier visits were paid by H.hl.S. lVillia?~r Scoresby 
to these two bases iii hlarch and, agaiii, in tlpnl, 1944. Alagistrates 
were sworii iii for the South Orkneys, Soiith Slietlaiids and Grahani 
Land, and a specinl series of postage. stamps was issued for the 
iise of British cstablislimciits in those tcrritories and in South 
Grorgia. Since 1944 the U~iited Iiiiigdom lias inaiiitaiiied a iiiiinber 
of British büses in the Dependencies, the followiiig beirig the bases 
(either coiistructed or re-established) iii the ti:rritories on \\,hich 
Argeiitiiin hns innde encroachmerits- 
So~tlr Orkneys- 
Saiidefjord Bay, Coronatioii Islaiid (1945). 
Cape Geddes, Laiirie Island (1946). 
Sigiiy Islniid (1947). 
Soi~th Shetla?~ds- 
Port Foster. Deception Island 11944) $. 
r\dmir;ilty Ray, King George Islaiid (1947). 
Grnhni~i Land a t ~ d  its Archifielagos- 
Port Lockroy, Palmer Archipelago (1944). 
Hope Bay, Triiiity Peniiisula (194j). 
Stonington Island, &%arguerite Bay (1946). 
Barry Islaiitl, Debenham Islands (1946) Io. 
Argentine Islands (1947) ln. 
Ililse Bay, Trinity Peninsula (1953). 
The Uiiited Kiiigdom Government hns seiit ships to the South 
Shetlaiids-Grahain Laiid area every tiiitarctic summer since 
1944; and al1 the above bases, with the exception of those in 
Laurie Islaild and in the 'Debenliain Islands, have been occupied 
either coiitinuously or interrnitteiitly by British parties. A special 
organisation, the Falkla?id Islands Depeitdeitcies Sriraey, was set 
up in 1945 to administer these bases, together with three others 
in the South Orkneys, and to supervise their work. Under its 
.. -- 
' Headquarters of British Yagistratcs. igio-30. 
I n  Riiilt and occupied by tlio British Graham Land Expedition, 1935-37. 

direction cxteiisi\xc s~i-\~cys 
aiicl cxploratioiis were i:arrie<l ont in 
the Depciideiicies, iiicluding grouiid siirveys, over large stretcties 
of tlie Grnliaiii T-aiid ~iciiiiisiila. aiitl ineteorological stations were 
establishcd. So\sereigiity \ras :tlso diplayed in other ways as, foi 
exaiiiple, by the appoiiitiiient of niagistrates, the issiie of postage 
stainps, niid the lodgiiig of protests 110th locally and through the. 
diploinatic cliaiiiiel agaiiist encroacliniciits by Chileaii aiid Argen- 
tine parties. Tlios, tlie United ICiiigdoin Govcrnrneiit has at al1 
times takcii al1 sucli stcps as were operi to it in the circurnstaiices 
to asscrt aiicl inaint~iiii its titlc. 
. , 
Argentins's Persistence in Her Pretensions to the Falkland Islands 
Dependencies and in Her Physical Encroachments on the South 
Orkneys. South Shetlands and Graham Land 
3 .  I I  1941 Argentiiia. \vliicli iii tlie period ~gzj-36 had put 
for\vard iiiaiiily paper claiins, eiiil>arked iipoii a tlefiiiite policj 
of encroachiiieiit in the So~itli Orkiieys, Soutli Shetlands and 
Grsahani 1.niicI. In tlint year the mcteorological station on Laune 
Islaiid iii tlic Soiitli Orkiieys \vns iii:miied by t\rgciitiiie ?zava/ 
personnel, aiid thc opeiiiiig of a periiiaiieiit post office in the 
Soiith Orkiieys \vas eniioiiiiçed iii t\rgentiiin and notifiecl tlirough 
tlie Iiiternatiotial i'ostal 
tinioii. l'lie follo\viiig j7ear the naval 
transport ZJriiileru [le Arlnyo \iras sent to 1leceptioii Islaiid iii 'the 
Soiitli Shetlands \vhere, ;is l i a  nlready beeii stated, it painted 
the Argeiitiiie colours »il tlie ivalls of tlie Hcktor Whnliiig Coin- 
paiiy's factory and cleposited ilic noiicc claiming :\II laiids and 
depciidencics I)etweeii 25' 
aiid 6s" 34' \Vest, wvhicli is nientioned 
in paragrapli 3 ;tl)o!:e. Tlic ship thcii proceeded to Lainbda Islaiid 
(;\lelcliior Group) iii the Paliiicr r\rcliipelago and erected a flag 
aiid Ixacon there. r\ year I;itcr. tlie :\rgentinc coloiirs on Deceptioii 
Islaiid were ul>literated by H.1I.S. Crrritnrÿoa Cirstle, and the 
Argentine act of possessioii \\,as rcrnovecl (l~aragraph 30 above). 
011 being so iiiforiiied, the :\rgciitiiie Foreign >liiiister replied 
tliat the t\rgeiitiiie,Govcriiincnt coiisidcred its clairns, "inlierited 
froin Spaiii 12", tu l x  justifietl. l n  :i menioraiidnm ol February 15. 
,1943, tlie Argentine Go\-eriiinciit reaffiriiietl its prcieiisions to $1 
Antnrçtiç laiids aiid depeii~lciicics soutli of latitiide 60" Soutli 
" As has already becxi iiieiitioiie<l (~raragraplis 3 and 26-28 above), i\rgeiitina lias 
iiia<lç a pape* daim to ail the territories coinpriscd in tlic Falkland !slandsDcpcnd- 
eiicies. Slie lias not. Iiowever. atteniptçd to assert tliis clairn iii any overt way 
with rrferenca <O tlie Soutli Suiidwiçli Islaiirls or Soutli Ceorgia. These territovics 
are iiot tlierefore further inentiiined Iiçreiii, except iii the Conclusions. 
': Tlie territories ci~iicerned wcm barely discovrred iii Spain's day. aiid thçii riot 
1,). Spain (sïc purngraplis 6-1 i :tbovcj. 'l'hey wcrc ncaer part ofany Spanishdominioii. 
. .. 

jr 
:\I~i'I,IC:\TlON 
INSTITU'I'ING 
I>KOCEEULN<:S (V jj) 
aiid I>ci\veeti Iiiiigitudes nj" aiici 68" 34' \trcst. It also yurl>orte<l 
t i ~  "protest" :rg:~iiist j~irisdictioi~i~l 
ac1s carrietl oilt hv British 
officiais. l'lic Uiiited I<iiigdoni Goveriimcnt, iii a riicmorandiini 
of .4pril 7, 1941, replied reassertiiig the Kritisli titles. Meaiiwhile, 
the Prifnrro [le Muyo ivas eiigaged on a second espedition tu the 
Ant;lrctiç, during \vliicli it visitetl the Melchior Islaiids aiid Port 
Lockroy iii tlic Pilliner r\rchipcl:igo. ;riici Marguerite Bay forther 
to tlic Si~iitli. The ship tlieii rctlirned to 1)eception Islaiid iii th,: 
Soutli Slietlaiitls, aiitl there r<:l>aiiited tlic .-\rgeiitiiic coloiirs ori 
the \\.ails of the \I1liale factor!.. It was aftci. this exlieditioii that 
the Ijiiited Kiiigtlom, despite its heavy coiiiiriitiiieiits iii the secoiid 
world \r,:lr, iiiiti:lted iii 1944 thc pr<ig,lraiiiiiie of iiiairitaiiiiiig I3ritisli 
bases iii the Sucith Orkiieys, South Slietlaiids aiid Gr:\liam Laiid 
descrihecl iii 1>;trngral>li 31 :rhrnre. 
33. 111 1947, %iiiic tliree yc;trs aftcr the reiienfal of tlie Britisli 
1)rograniiiic of I~nses, tlie ..\rgeiitiiie Goveriiiiieiit began a course 
of systernatiç ciicroaclimeiit oir the Ilritisli territories of the Sontli 
Slietlaiids aiid Grahaiii I.aiit1. \Vhile citirtitiiiiii~ its ineteorological 
station :lt Latirie Islaiid in the Sniith Orkiieys, it proceeded to 
estal>lish, as well as a fe\v eii1i:rgeiicy hiits, the followviiig .4rgentiiie 
Posts la: 
South Slzetlrrir~ls- 
I'ort Foster, l:)ecelitioii Islatid (1947). 
Half Nooii Islaiid. Liviiigst:sti~ne Islniid (1952). 
l'otter Covc, Kiiig George Islaiid (19j3). 
Harnioiiy Coire, Xclsoii Islaiid (1954). 
itrdley Peiiiiisuln, I<iiig George Island (1954). 
Graham Lnicd rritd ils Ara:hipelagos- 
Gainnia lslaiicl, Palnier Archipelago (1947). 
Paradise Harlioiir, llaiico Coast (19j1). 
Barry Island, 1)ebenhaiii Islands (1951). 
Hope Bay. l'riiiity Peniiisuln (1951). 
I>iiiidee Islniid (1gj2). 
Brialinoiit Cove (19j4). 
Peteriiiniiii Isl;riid (19j5). 
Conls Laird- 
Iii the iieighl~oiirlio<~l 
of Valiscl Bay (10jj). 
Thesc posts are al1 withiii the I7alklaiid Islaiids L)epeiideiicies aiid. 
in areas covered hy British :ictivity as already descrihed. The 
- 
~
~
p
p
 
" The Uiiiiqtcl tiiti&.lrtiit i.overiiii!i:iil 
;ai<. ;till c ~ > g ~ g ~ < l  
in iilvcrrkgi%riii& tlie nii>ii 
ioccnt Argentine ciisronch~neiit at Vahrel IIa) iil Cuat I.an<l (ïre l>nracrnl>li- 
4 
1 4  
end i~ ahiivt.) where ari ,\rpîntine po$r nia). Iiave h a n  estal>lisl~e,l 

32 
API>I,ICATIOiY ILÏSTITUTING YROCEEL>IX<;S (Y jj) 
recciit or very recent establishment of these hrgentiiie posts 
appears to foreshado\v a rapid expansion of the prcseiit Argentine 
encroachiiieiits ;ilid \~iof:itioiis of British sovereignty. I'rotests 
against these \~iolatioiis niid eiicroachments have been lodgecl at 
vanous dates hy the United Kingdoni througli the diplomatic 
channel, aiid 1oc:illy by vIXci:ils of the British Admiriistratioii in 
the Falklaiid Iskriids 1)epeiideiicics. The Argeiitiiie Goveriimeiit 
has iievertlieless persisted in its policy of encroachmeiit, iiiaiii- 
taiiiing the :rbove-iiieirtioiied posts, and repeatedly niaiiifesting 
its intention to coiitiiiiie to disregard the United Kiiigdoin's prior 
and areIl-established legnl litles. 
34. In tlic ril,iiiioii of the Uiiitect liiiigdoiii Govcriiinciit. these 
Argentine nets takeii tog-ctlicr, aiid related to the coniplete absence 
of aiiy Argentine claiiii prior to 192.5 or 1937, as the case iiiay he 
(dcpendiiig oii the territory concerncd), and to the pi-evioiis coni- 
plete Argïntinc indiffcrciiçc to, and even recognitioii of, the British 
claim, are cvidcncc of a quite recent, deliberate, and coiisidered 
policy of infiltration on the part of thc Argentine C;o\.ernineiit, 
directed to creatii~g a sernblance or fiction of Argeiitiric sovereignty, 
and to placing tliat Governiiient in a position, after a suliicicrit lapse 
of tinie, to argue that any previous British sovereigiity \vas no\\. 
replaced or overlaitl by Argentine sol-creignty. In effect. this is a 
polie? of usurpatioii. 
Limited Relevance in Point of Law of Events after 1925 in the Case 
of the South Orkneys and after 1937 in the Case of the South 
Shetlands and Graham Land 
35. Thc acts of the Parties after 1925 in the case of the Soritli 
Orkneys and after 1937, in the case of the Soiith Çl~ctlaiids :riid 
Graham Land, :ire of 1iniitt:d juridical relevaiicc, for t\\.o reasoiis. 
First, tlii: clisputi: crystallisecl whcn Argentine first asscrtetl her 
clairns, iiaiiicly iii or ahoiit 1926 in the case of the Soiitli Orkiicys. 
and in or ahoiit 1937 in thc case of thc other two tcrritories ; and 
accortliiig tu well-cstal>lishcd priiiciples of law, it is :rt the datc of 
crystallisation that tlic rights of the Parties arc ta be arljiidged. 'The 
subse~luciit acts of thc tlrgcntiiic Govcriiment werc clearly iintlci-- 
l 
takeii, iiot ris a geniiiiic inanifestatiori of an esisting title, lxit witli 
a vicw to trying to crcate one, and in order to improvc .Argentilla's 
legal position. They are not, therefore, to he taken into considcratioii 
(Miny~~zers 
niid Ecrelios Case, I.C.J. Reports, 1953, pagc jg). 
Secondly, wen if the United Kingdom had not previously accluircd 
a good titlc, it undoubtedly displayed and exercised its sovei-cignty 
in and in regard to the South Orkneys, Soiith Shetlands aiid Grahani 
Land during (at the latcst) a period running-in 
the case of the first- 
nametl territory-from 
Jiily 21. 1906, to 19zj and after ; aiid-in 


34 
:\PPLICATIOS 
ISSTITUTISG I'HOCEEDINGS 
(Y 55) 
Islarid uf Plilmns Case (pages S54-S5j, 869 and 870) negatives coni- 
pletcly ariy Argentinc claim based on so-called geographical grounds 
of title, aritl clcarly lays down that tliey coiild not prevail against 
actiial display ancl csercise of sovcreigiity. 1 t has also beeii suggestcd 
on belialf of Argentins that she never rccognised British sovereigiity 
over the Ilepcndeiicies. lgnoring for present purposes the qiiestioii 
whether recognition hy other States is iiecessary for the acqiiisition. 
of title, and if so in what circumstances, it siiffices herc to recall the 
facts related iii paragraph 24 (2) above, \\.hich establish Argeiitiiia's 
ac(luirsccrice in and recognition of the British clainrs to those tcri-i- 
tories. But in any event the Ensterit Greeiiland Case (page 62) and 
the Minquiers n ~ l  
Ecrehos Case (page 66) clearly show that aiiy 
failure by Argeiitina to recognise tho British claims would not ha\.e 
altered the character and legal effects of the British Letters Patent, 
or of the other British legislative ancl ntlininistrntive acts, as inani- 
festatioris of British sovereignty. 
. . 
.. . 
. . 
j,;- 
. . 
38. At thc suiiie tiiiie, tlic above-iiicntioned leadiiig ciiscs shou- 
co~clusively that al1 recogtiised juricliail groonds stroirgly sripport 
the claiins of the United Kingdom, aiitl iiot those of Argentiiia. Thus 
the Island O/ Pal?rrns Case (page 870) aiitl the Clififierton Isllri~d Case 
(cage I 110) indicate that the British takings of possessioii tlcscribctl 
cfparagraplis 6-1 1 of the present Alq~lication crcated iiiitial British 
titles superior to ;in). of Argentins's preteiided histoncalorgeograpli- 
ical' titles. The Islan[l O/ Pakrms Case (pages 838-S4o aiid 567). 
Ensterqt Greeitlai~d Case (pages ji., 54 aiid 63) and iVIirryr~ierî n i ~ ~ i  
Ecrehos Case (at page 65) conclusi\~ely show that to-day, in case of 
(lispirte, the primary test of sovereignty is the actual display and 
exercise of the fiinctions of a State in arid iii regard to the dispiited 
territories tlirring the rele\~ant periods. Iii the ltreserit case, it is 
evident froiii the facts set out in the preseiit Application tliat it is 
the United Kingdoni, not Argeiitina, that has displayed aiid exer- 
cised the furiction of a State in regard to the South Orkneys, South 
Shetlands and Graham Land, aiid csyecially during the tlecisive 
pkriods imincdiately preceding the critical dates, that is tlic ycriotl 
iipto 1925 in the case of the Soiith Orkneys. and up to 1-37 in tlie 
case of the othcr two territones, as \\.cil as earlier. 
. .. 
. .3g. Tlie Uiiited Icingdom, iii its pleaàiirgs, wiil refer with greater 
1~àrticirlarity to the nuinerous passages in the four above-iiientioiied 
leading cases and in other authorities \\,hich support its titles to 
soverejgnty over the Falkland Islands 1)ependencies. Although the 

,35 
APPLICATIOS INSTITU'TIXG PROCEEDINGS (\. jj) 
prcsent .Application is iiecessarily preliminary in cliaracter, the 
special circumstaiices appear to justify drawing attention to the 
jurisprudence of the four leading cases, as an indication of how solid 
are the legal bases of the British titles and hou. devoid of any foiin- 
tlatioii th(: Argentine pretciisions. 
Acceptance of the Court's Jurisdiction in the Case 
40. Tlie Lnited iiingclom, Iia\riiig regard tr, the long pcriod d~wing 
which British sovercigiity has been effectivcly exercised iv. and in 
regard to the tcrritories of thc Falkland Islands, would be justified 
in takiiig stroiig incasures tu piit an end to Argentins's eiicroach- 
meiits on the Soiith Orknays, Soiith Shetlands and Graham Land14. 
1;irnily believing in the pacific settleinent of disputes ainong nations 
I)y judicial procedures and on tlic basis of law, it has prefcrred, when 
ncgotiations proved fniitless, to scek to have its dispute with thc 
liepiiblic of Argentinn regardiiig these territories siihmittcd to the 
Iiiteriiatiorial Coiirt or othcr jiidicial or arbitral tribuiial. Thus, in 
Notes of December 17, 1947, the United Kiiigdom Goveriiment 
invitcd Argentins, aiid Chile to whoin a separate invitation \vas sent, 
to challenge the British titlcs to sovereignty hg invokiiig the jiins- 
(lictioii of the International Coiirt of Justice, \\'hich tlic United 
Kiiigdoiii \vould then accïpt. rirgcntina, in a Note of January 28, 
1945. replicd to the cffcct that shc was coii\rinccd of the uiiquestion- 
:thle rights of hersclf aiid Cliilc ovcr the disputed arcas15, and that 
it woiild bc nrroiig for hcr h> appcar before the Court in the position 
of a Statc requesting what alrcady I~elonged to hcr. The United 
Kingtloiii rcnewed its offcr to go bcfore the Court in Xotes of 
hpril 30. igjr, and February 16, 19j3. without, hou~ever, obtaining 
a favourable response from the Reyublic of Argentina. As the con- 
tinuaiice of the dispute conccrning the sot~ereignt) of the terri- 
tories of the Falkland Islands 1)epeiideiicies iiecessarily tlireatens 
t a  inipair the.existing frieiidly relations betwecn th(: two.countnes, 
the United Kiiigdoin addrcssed a fiirther Note to Argentina on 
I>cccrnher 21, 1954; iiivitiiig hcr, jointly with the Uiiitetl Kingdom, 
to refcr thc dispute to an indepciident ud hoc arbitral tribunal. 
On the samc date, the United Kingdoni adtlrcsscd :ri1 identical 
" i'orçiblc nclioii liacl iii isct Lu be takoti iii oiie casc (iiaiiicly a l  I>~.cïptioii Idand 
iii Lieliriiary ,953). \i.heii a particularly llagrant attrinpt was innde t« erect an 
Argciitine but actually witliin the prcçiiictj of thc existin; (niicl oeciipieil) Rritisli 
Iiax on tliat island. 
'= 
This can ooly increasï the ilubious charnctçr of the Argentine preiensionj, since 
Clic hrgcntine and Chileuri claims conHict o r c i  the most important part of the 
ground. Both coiild iiot be voliii çven i f  çitl,cr wçre. 
. 
. .  

Note to Chile. Xeither of tliese couiitricsiG, howcver, has thought 
fit to accept tlie United Kingdom's proposal, and the Argentine 
Govemineiit has in the meantime sent an expedition to Vahsel 
Bay in Coats Land-a 
factor so recent tliat the United Kingdom 
Goveriiiiient has nnt yet had time to investigatc it. 
41. Tlic Uiiit<:tl I<iiigdoin. in its Notes of Ilecciiiber zr last. 
statcd that. iii tlie cvent of Argstitina (or cqually Chilc) failiiig to 
accepl its offcr of arbitration, it reserved the right to take such 
steps as rnight I>c opeii to it to ohtaiii ail adjiidicatiori of its legal 
rights. Onc of the steps opeii to thc United Kiiigdom is to bring 
the dispute beforc the Court 1)'. 
a unilateral t\pplicatioii under 
Article 40 (1) of tlie Statute aiid Article 32 (2) of the Kules, aiid, 
as indicatccl iii l>aragrapli I above, it is this procedure which the 
Iinited 1;iiigdoiii has elected in adopt. 
4% Tlic United I<iiigdoiii Goveriiiiierit, tliercfuri:. dcclarcs that 
it hercby sul>iiiits tu the jurisdictinn of the Court for tlie purposes 
of thc case rcfcrretl to the Court in the prescrit Applicatioii-(for 
thc prccisc scopc rif tliis siil)inissio~~, 
sec footiiotc r to paragraph I 
abovc). Tlic Argciitiiie i:;o\,crnment has riot, so far as tlic United 
Kingdoin Govcriiinciit is alrare, yet filetl nny dcclarntion acceptiiig 
the Court's jurisdicticiii. either generally uiidcr :\rticle 36 (2) of the 
Statutc or spccially iii the present case. Tlic i\rgcntiiie Coveriirncnt. 
\\.hich has freqiieiitly espresscd its adhercncc to the priiiciple of 
judicial scttleiiiciit of international disputes, is, however, legally 
qiialified tu sul>iiiil tri the jurisdictioii of the Court iii this case. 
Conseqiiciitly, ul,oii iiotificatioii of the prcseiit t\pl>lic:itiori to the 
Kel>ublic of Argciitiiia b!; 
the Kegisti-ar iii accortlance with the 
Kitles of Court, the .Argciitiiie Governineiit, under the settled 
jiirislxudciice of the Court, caii take the iiccessary steps to that 
end, and thcrcb~~ 
cause the Court's jurisdicjitiii iii the case to he 
constitiitcd iri rcsl>i:ct of hot11 Parties. 
' 
43. Tlie tiiiitctl Iiiiigdom Governiiieiit fuuiids tlit: jurisdictioii 
of the Court oii the furegoing corisideratioiis aiid oii Article 36 (1) 
-of .thc Court's Statiite ; aiicl asks that a copy of the preseiit Appii- 
catioii bc traiisiiiitted to the Governnieiit of t\rgciitiiia iii accord- 
ance with t\rticle 33 of the Kules of the Coiirt, and to al1 meinbers 
of the United Xatioiis and other States cntitled to appear before 
the Coiirt, iiiitlcr ~irticle 34 of the said Kules. 
' 
' q \ f l i i l ï  tl>c irrcsïnt ;\l>plicstioii is of coursc. foriiiali!.. qitilu sçj>siate fruei tlie 
curiciirrcnt applicati<,ii i n  respect of Chile, tlic fact tliat t1iei.c are alsu Cliileun prï- 
tensiorir rclating 10 tliï South Shetlands-(;rnliant I.ai>d area. aiici of equally or 
eveii niore recoiit date. lias a rignificaiirc that catinut bc u\~crloolicrl I t  is 
clcar 
case of tivci rival ntid izicompntible atteiiipts to oilst ancl osrirp the legititnatr 
soverïiazity of 111,: IJiiited liiiig<lnrn. 
. . . . 

37 
APPLICATION INSTlTUTING PROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
44. The attitude of the Argentine Government in this case has 
compelled the United Kingdom to take the initiative in placing 
the matter before the Court, and therefore in effect to appear as 
applicant. The United Kingdom Govcrnment nevertheless wishes 
to make the fullest rcservations on thc question of the onus of 
proof of title. It considers that the manifest priority in time of the 
British possession oi the terntories, dating back to periods varying 
between IIO and 180 years ago, and the complete absence during 
virtually the whole of those periods. until a quite rccent date, of 
any activities of a sovereign character, other than British, in the 
territories, is indicative of a self-evident British title, which i t  
is for any country challenging that titlc to rebut. 
The Contentions and Claims of the United Kingdom Government 
in the Case 
45. The Govemnieiit of the United Kingdom, in submitting this 
application to the Court, accordiiigly contends :- 
(1) that by reason of historic British discoveries of certain terri- 
tories in the Antarctic and siib-Antarctic ; by reason of the 
long-continued and peaceful display of British sovereignty 
from the date of thosc discoveries onwards in, and in 
regard to, the territories concerncd; by reason of the 
incorporation of these territories in the dominions of the 
British Crown ; by virtue of their forma1 constitution in 
the Royal Letters Patent of 1908 and 1917 as the British 
Possession called the Falkland Islands Dependencies : the 
United Kingdom possesses, and at aü material dates has 
possessed, the sovereignty over tlie territories of the 
Falkland Islands l)cpcndencies, and in particular the South 
Sandwich Islands, South Georgia, the South Orkneys, 
South Shetlands, Graham Land and Coats Land ; 
(2) that the legal titles of tlic United Kingdom to the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies, and in particular to the South 
Sandwich Islands, South Georgia, the South Orkneys. 
South Shetlands, Graham Land and Coats Land, are, and 
at au material dates have becn, superior to the claims 
of any othcr State, and in particular to those of the Republic 
of Argentina ; 
(3) that, in consequence, the pretensions of the Republic of 
Argentina to the South Sandwich Islands, South Georgia, 
the South Orkneys, South Shetlands, Graham Land and 
Coats Land, and her encroachments and pretended acts 
of sovereignty in those territories are, under international 
law, illegal and invalid. 

38 
APPLICATION II~STITUTIKG PROCEEDIKGS (v j j) 
46. The Government of the United Kingdom. therefore, asks the 
Court to declare- 
(1). that ththe United Kingdom, as against the Republic of Argen- 
tins, possesses, and at ail material dates has possessed,' 
valid and subsisting legal titles to the sovereignty over al1 
the temtories comprised in the Falkland Islands Depend- 
encies, and in particular South Sandwich Islands, South 
Georgia, the South Orkneys, South Shetlands, Graham 
Land and Coats Land ; 
(2) that the pretensions of the Republic of Argeritiria to the 
temtories comprised in the Falkland Islands Dependencies, 
and in particular South Sandwich Islands, South Georgia. 
the South Orkneys, South Shetlands, Graham Land and 
Coats Land, and her encroachments and pretended acts 
of sovereignty in or relative to any of those territories are, 
under international law, illegal and invalid ; 
(3) that the Republic of Argentina is bound to respect the United 
Kingdom's sovereignty over the territories comprised in 
the Falkland Islands Dependencies, and iii particular 
South Sandwich Islands, South Georgia, the South Orkneys, 
South Shetlands, Graham Land and Coats Land, to cease 
her pretensions to exercise sovereignty in or relative to 
those territories and, if caiied on by the United Kingdom. 
to withdraw from them al1 or any Argentine personnel and 
equipment. 
. . 
1 have the honour to be, 
Sir, 
Your obedient Servant, 
(Signed) G. G. FITZMAURICE, 
Agent for the Government of 
the United Kingdom. 



42 
AXXEXES l'O APPLICATIOS (NO. 1) 
such Courts and for tlie Administration of Justice as may be necessary 
for the peace, order, and good govemment of Our subjects and others 
within the said present or future Settlements respectively, or any of 
tliem, any law, statute, or usage to the contrary, in any wise notwith- 
standing : 
And whereas by the said recited Act of Parliament it is further enacted 
that it shall be lawful for Us, by any Commission or Commissions under 
tlie Great Seal of the United Kingdom, or by any Instmctions under 
Our Signet and Sign Illanual accompanying and referred to in any 
such Commission or Commissions, to delegate to any three or inore 
persons within any of the Settlements aforesaid respectively, the powers 
and authorities so vested in Us in Our Privy Council as aforesaid, 
either in whole or iri part, and upon, iinder, and subject to al1 such 
conditions. ~rovisoes. and limitations as bv anv such Commission. or 
. 
Comniissioiis ur Iiisiructioiis, as ;iforeinid, \\je sl;nll sec tit to I,rc;cril>e 
Pro\,idcd al\r,ay;. tlint n~~t\i.ith~tnritliii:: 
aiiy siicli delcgalioii uf aiitliority 
as aforcs;iid. it sliall still bc ci,iiil>l.teiit to lis iii Oiir l'iivv ('oiiiicil. III 
inanner afoiesaid, to esercise all'the powers and authonties so veited 
as aforesaid in Us in Our Privy Council : 
Now therefore, in pursuance and esercise of the powers so vested in 
Us as aforesaid by the said recitcd Act of Parliament, We, of Our special 
Grace, certain knowledge and mere motion, by this Commission under 
the Great Seal of the United Kingdom aforesaid. delegate to the persons 
hereinafter named within the said Falkland Islands, the powers and 
autliorities so vested in Us in Our Pnvy Council as aforesaid ; but upon, 
under and subject to.all sucli conditions, provisoes, and limitations as 
by this Our Commission, or by the Instructions under Our Signet and 
Sign Manual accompanying the same, are prescribed. And \\'e 
do 
declare Our Pleasure to be, and do hereby declare and grant, that the 
Governor for the tiine being of the said Falkland Islands, and such other 
persons, not being less tlian two, as are Iiereinafter dcsignated, sliall 
constitute and be a Legislative Council for the said Islands. And We do 
hereby direct and appoint tliat the persons other than tlie said Governor 
constituting the said Legislative Council sliall be such Public Officers 
within the said Islands as shall be designated, or such otber persons 
within the same as shaU from time be named for that purpose by Us by 
any Instmction or Instmctions, or Warrant or Warrants, to be by Us 
for tliat purpose issued under Our Signet and Sign hlanual, and with 
the advice of Our Privy Couiicil, al1 of wliich Council1o;s shall hold 
their places in the said Council at our pleasure. 
And We do hereby authorise, empower, and enjoin siicli Legjslative 
Council to make and establisli al1 such Laws, Institutions, and Ordi- 
nances as may from time to time be necessary for the peace, order, and 
good govemment of Our subjects and others within the said present or 
future Settlements in the said Falkland Islands and in their Dependen- 
cies : and Our pleasure is that in the making and establishing al1 such 
Laws, Institutions, and Ordinances, the said Legislative Council shall 
conform to and observe ail such rules and regulations as shall be given 
and prescribed in and by such Instructions as We, with the advice of Our 
Privy Council, shaU from time ta time make for thcir guidance therein : 
Provided nevertheless, and We do herehy reserve to Ourselves, Our 
Heirs and Successors, Our and Their riglit and authonty to disaUow 
any such Ordinances in the whole or in part ; and to make and establish 

44 
ASSEXES TO AI'PLICATIO'J (NO. 1) 
time being, full power and authority, as he shall see occasioii, in Our 
name and oii Our behalf, to grant to any offender convicted of any 
crime, in any Court, or before any Judge, Justice, or Ilagistrate within 
Our said Settlements, a free and uncoiiditional pardon, or a pardon 
subject to such conditions as by any Law or Ordinance hereafter to be 
in force in Our said Settlements may be thereunto annexed, or any 
respite of the execution of the sentence of any such offeiider for such 
period as to such Govemor may seem fit. 
And We do hereby give and grant unto the Govemor of Our said 
Settlements, for the time being, full power and authority, upon sufficient 
cause to liirn appearing, to suspend from the exercise of his office within 
Our said Settlements any person exercising any office or place under or 
by virtue of any Commission or \Vamant granted, or which may be 
granted, by Us, or in Our name, or under Our authority ; which suspen- 
sion shall continue and have effect oiily until Our pleasure therein shall 
be made known and signified to such Govemor. And We do hereby 
strictly require and enjoin the Governor of Our said Settlements, for 
the time being, in proceeding to any such suspension, to observe the 
directions in that behalf given to him by Our Instructions under Our 
Signet and Sign Manual, accompauying his Commission of appointment 
as Governor of the said Settlements. 
And in the event of the death or absence out of Our said Settlements 
in the Falkland Islands and in their Dependencies, of such person as 
may be commissioned and appointed by Us to be the Governor thereof, 
We do hereby provide and declare Our pleasure to be, that al1 and every 
the powers and aiithonties herein granted to the Govemor of Our said 
Settlements in the Falkland Islands and in their Dependencies for the 
time heing, shaU be and the same are hereby vested in such person as 
inay be appointed by Us by Warrant under Our Signet and Sign Manual 
to be the Lieutenant-Governor of Our said Settlements ; or in the event 
of there being no person within Our said Settlements commissioned 
and appointed by Us to be Lieutenant-Governor thereof, then Our 
pleasure is and \Ve do herebv ~rovide and declare. that in such contin- 
iency ail tlic powcrs and auili6rities Iierein graritcd to tlii: (;o\fcrririr or 
1-ieutcnant-Govenir,r of Our said Çettleiiieiits. sliall bc and tlic sarne 
arc.ti~'rchy grniiteil to rhc lusticr of tlie I'encr whost: iianie slinll be 
standing fir& in order in any general Commission of tlie Pcace, issued 
by the Governor or Oiïicer administering the Governmeiit of Our Settle- 
ments in the Falkland Islands and of their Dependencies, such Commis- 
sion of the Peace being revocablc and renewable from time to time by 
such Govcriior or Admiiiistrator of the Government, as he may fiiid 
occasion ; arid such Lieutenant-Governor or such Justice of the Peace, 
as may be, sliall execute al1 and every the powers and authorities herein 
granted until Our further pleasure shaU be signified therein. 
And We do hereby require and command ali Our Officers and Ministers, 
civil and military, and al1 other the inhabitants of Our said Settlements 
in the Falkland Islands and their Dependeiicies, to be obedient, aidiiig 
and assisting to such person as may be commissioned aiid appointed 
by Us to be the Governor of Our said Settlements, or in the event of his 
death or absence to such person as may, under the provisions of these 
Our Letters Patent, assume and exercise the functions of such Governor. 

46 
.ASSEXES TO APPLICATION (No. 1) 
(c) to employ any licensed vessel to tow, buoy, or manufacture in 
Colonial waters wliale carcasses taken outside Colonial waters 
by any unauthorised vessel. 
The Governor in Council may make regulatioiis for :- 
(a) Fixing the conditions of licences ; 
(6) Regulating the numher of licences to be granted in any one year ; 
(c) Defining the limits within which a licence-liolder may take 
whales ; 
(d) Regulating tlie numher of whales to he taken ; 
(e) Regulating the disposai for forfeited whales, oil, &c. ; and 
(1) Generally for carrying out the provisions of the Ordinance. 
The owner or lessee of any land may take possession of a derelict whale 
with permissioii of the Governor in Couiicil and on payment of a royalty. 
Provision is made for taking whales for scientific purposes. 
During the \Var Ordinances were passed requiring the products of 
the whaling industry to be brought to, and sold in, the United Kingdom. 
(B) REGULATIONS 
(a) South Gcorgin.-Thc 
rcgulations 
(1) Prohibit leaseholders from kiliing or shooting any whale calf or 
any female whale which is accompaiiied by a calf ; 
(2) Reserve to the Crown any dead whale ahandoned or throwii up 
on the seashore ; 
(3) Prescribe penalties for breaches of t1ie.regulations. 
a ions 
(b) 0thu ~e~e~idencies.-The regul t' 
(1) Provide for the issue of annual licences (October to September) ; 
(2) Prohihit licensed vessels from catcliing whales for a Company 
other tlian that mentioned in the licence ; 
(3) Authorise tlie use of (a) two floating factories, in conjunction 
witli two whale catchers-fee 
Szoo; and (6) a third whale 
catcher-fee 
£100 ; 
(4) Require the provisiori of pressure boilerç for dealing witli the 
residue of the carcass; 
(5) Prescribe that separate licences shall be issued for.:- 
''(a) The South Shetlands and Graham Land; 
(6) The South Orkneys; . 
(c) ï h e  Falkland Islands ; 
(d) The South Sandwich Islands ; 
but that no further licence or lease for whaling purposes shall 
be issued, with tlie exception of reuewals of cxisting annual 
liceiices for, two floating factories and two whale catchers, or 
of a third whale catcher, withotit the permission of the Governor 
in Council ; 
(6) Require every licensed vessel at the end of the season to proceed 
direct ,to a port of entry and to report full particulars of the 
catch, including the number of barre- of ail atid!the quantity 
of baleen and guano .obtained ; 
. 
. 
