INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE 
PLEADINGS, ORAL ARGUMENTS, DOCUMENTS 
ANTARCTICA CASES 
(UNITED KINGDOM v. ARGENTINA; 
UNITED KINGDOM v. CHILE) 

COUR INTERNATIONALE DE JUSTICE 
MÉMOIRES, PLAIDOIRIES ET DOCUMENTS 
AFFAIRES RELATIVES A 
L'ANTARCTIQUE 
(ROYAUME-UNI C. ARGENTINE ; 
ROYAUME-UNI c. CHILI) 
ORDONNANCES DU 16 MARS 1956: RADIATION DU R ~ L E  

2. APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS AGAINST 
THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE 
THE AGENT FOR THE GOVERNRlENT OF THE UNITED 
XINGDOhf TO THE REGISTRAR OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
COURT OF JUSTICE AT THE HAGUE 
FOREIGN 
OFFICE, 
LONDON, S.W. I, 
May. 19.55. 
Sir, 
1 have the honour to refer to Articles 40 (1) of the Statute of 
the International Court of Justice and Article 32 (2) of the Rules 
of Court and, by direction of Her Majesty's Principal Secretary 
of State for Foreign Affairs, to submit an Application instituting 
proceedings in the name of the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland against the Republic of Chile in the following 
case '. 
2. Differences have arisen between the Govemrnents of the 
United Kingdom and of the Republic of Chile since Novernber 6, 
1940, conceming pretensions advanced by the Republic in a 
Presidential Decree of that date, to the sovereignty of certain 
Antarctic and sub-Antarctic territones which belong to the United 
Kingdom under prior, long standing, and well established legal 
titles dating from, at latest, the period 1775-1843. The particular 
temtones in dispute between the two countries, namely the South 
Shetland Islands and Graham Land, form part of Falkland Islands 
Dependencies. These were already existing British possessions 
which (following on a long series of analogous enactrnents-see 
paragraph 13 below) were proclaimed as such and formally placed 
' I t  results from the pcesent Application that the United Kingdom Government 
accepts the juriidietion of the Court in respect of the questions hereby submitted 
to il, and in particular that of the title to the sovereignty ove1 the South Shetlands 
and Graham Land. The present Application does not constitute a submiçsion to the 
jurisdiction of the Court in any other respect. or as regards the title to sovereignty 
m e r  any temitory othor than the South Shetiands and Graham Land. 

49 
APPLICATION INSTITUTIXG PROCEEDISGS (V j5) 
under the administration of the Government of the Colony of 
Falkland Islands by Royal Letters Patent of July 21, 1908. These 
Letters Patent, the full text of which is set out in Annex I (No. I) 
to the present Application, specified as the principal territories. 
included within the Dependencies the temtories known as South 
Georgia, the South Orkneys, the South Shetlands and the Sandwich 
Islands, and the territory known as Graham Land. Fiirther Letters 
Patent of Ilarch 28, 1917 (Annex 1, No. z), were issued for the 
purpose of clarifying the extent of the Antarctic mainland together 
with its coastal archipelagos which were comprised within the- 
designation "territory of Graham Land" used in the earlier Letters 
Patent."Under 
the supplemental Letters Patent of 1917, the 
Dependencies were finally defined to include- 
"al1 islands and temtories xvhatsoever betwee~i the 20th degree- 
of West longitude and the goth degree of West longitude which 
are situated south of the joth parallel of South latitude ; and all. 
islands and territories whatsoever between the goth degree West 
longitude and the 80th degree of West longitude which are situated 
south of the 58th parallel of South latitude". 
The territories of the Dependencies, as so defined in the Letters. 
Patent of 1908 and 1917, which had long been British possessions, 
have for many years been utilised and administered by the Falkland 
Islands Government effectively, openly and, until recently, without 
any objection from the Republic of Chile, which facts are con- 
clusively shown in pafagraphs 6 to 25 below %. 
3. Notwvithstanding the United Kingdom's open assumption, and. 
longstandiig and peaceful exercise of sovereignty over the terri- 
tories concemed, and the clear and precise delimitation of the- 
Falkland Islandç Dependencies in the above-mentioned Letters. 
Patent, the Government of the Republic of Chile in the above-. 
mentioned Presidential Decree made the following announce- 
ment :- 
"Al1 lands, islands, islets, reefs of rocks, glaciers (pack-ice) already 
known, or to be discovered, and their resyective territorial waters, 
in the sector between longitudes j3' and 90" West, constitute the 
Chilean Antarctic or Chilean .4ntarctic temtory." 
The Decree, the full text of which in Spanish and English is set 
out in Annex I (No. 3), refers in terms only to Antarctic territory, 
but Chile's subsequent encroachments on British territory in the 
South Shetlands and at the northem extremity of Graham Land 
It will be understaod that although, for reasans of convenience. the territories. 
to which the present Application relates were constituted part of the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies for administrative purpones. the BriLish litle to these terri- 
tories is a separate and independent one which in no way derives from or dependî 
on the title to the Falkland Islands themselves. 

5" 
APPLICATION IXSTITUTIXG PROCEEDISGS (V jj) 
Iead the GoCernment of the United Kingdom to infer that the 
pretensions' fomiulated in the Chilean Presidential Decree also 
exfend to al1 territories within the spccified sector between longi- 
tudes 53' and go0 West, including those situatcd outside the 
Antarctic CircIe. 
4. The western limit of Chile's pretensions, as proclaimed in 
the Presidential Decree, is lonbitude goo West, whereas the \vesterii 
limit of the Falkland Islands Dependencies is longitude 80" West: 
The United Kingdom's present Application to the Court does 
not, thcrefore, concern Chile's preteiisionç in the areas between 
longitudes 80" and go" West, which lie outside the liniits of the 
Falkland Islands Dependencies. The eastern liniit of Chile's 
pretensions, as proclaimed in the Presidential Decree, is longitude 
53' Wcst. whereas the eastern limit of the Falkland Islands 
Dcpendencies is 33 degrccs further to the cast at longitude zoo 
West. The United Kingdoni's present Application does not, 
therefore, concern the areas of the Falkland Islands Ilependencies 
between longitudes zoo and 53' West, \%,hich lie outsidc the limits 
of Chile's pretensions. The northern limit of the Falkland Islands 
Dependencies in the longitudes in question being latitude 58' 
South, the United Kingdoni's present Application relates to the 
pretensions of Chile to the sovercignty of the islaiids and lands 
of the Dcpendencies which lie between longitudes 53' and 80" 
West and to the Southwards of latitiide 58" South. A map depicting 
the territoneç' in dispute bctween the United Kingdom and Chile 
is attached to the present Application as Annex z. As this map 
shows, the principal territones in dispute between the two countrics 
are the South Shetland Islands and Graham Land togethcr with 
its .coastal archipelagos. 
' j. The main facts relative to the United Kingdom's title to 
the sovereignty of the Falkland Islands Dependencies and the 
temtories comprised in it, and to the violation of her sovereignty 
by the Republic of Chile, are set out in paragraphs 6-33 below S. 
The United Kingdom Government considers that the facts stated 
in the present Application suffice to establish conclusively both 
the United Kingdom's title to sovereignty and the violation of 
that sovereignty by the Republic of Chile. The United Kingdom 
Government reserves the right, however, to amplify in its pleadings 
its exposition of the relevant facts and to furnish further proof 
of both these matters. 
The description of the originç of the British titles and of their subsequent con- 
solidation by occupation. user. administration and other means appropnate to the 
Circumstances of the territories, as cantained in paragraphs 6. 25 and 28-30 hereof, 
:are suhçtantially identical with the corresponding passages in the separate Appliea- 
Rion which the United Kingdom Government is making concurrcntly with the 
present one. eomplaining of violations of its sovercignty over the same area on the 
part of the Republic of Argentina. 

5' 
APPI.ICt\TION INSTITUTISG FROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
Origins of the. British Titles, Historic Discoveries and Acts of 
: 
Annexation by British Nationals in the Period 1675-1843 
6. The British title to the territories concerned goes back to a 
number of dates varyiiig from, at latest, 1775 to 1843 The first 
discovery of auy of the islands or lands of the Falkland Islands 
Dependencies may well have been that of South Georgia in 1675 
by the British merchant Anthony de la Roche. This group of 
islands was rediscovered in 1775 by the great English navigator 
Captain James Cook, R.N. .On Jaiiuary 17 of that pear he landed 
at three places on the island, took possession of it formally iii 
the name of King George III and called it South Georgiû iii honour 
of the King. 
7. Captain Cook also discovered the Soiith Sandwich Islands in 
1775. Sailing eastwards from South Georgia, he sighted first a small 
group of islands urhich he called the Clerke Rocks after the name of 
his lieutenant, and then, on January 31, a larger group which he 
called the Sandwich Land after the First Lord of the British Admi- 
ralty of that date. 
8. The Sozrth Shetland Islands were discovered by the English sea 
captain William Smith on Febrnary 18, 1819. Revisiting the islands 
* 
in Octoher of the same year, he landed, planted the British flag and 
formally took possession of the group in the name of King George 
III, cding it New South Britain-(this 
was aftenvards changed to 
South Shetlands, named after the Shetland Islands, north of Scot- 
land). A few months later, Edward Bransfield, R.N., accompanied 
by William Smith, proceeded again to the islands and made a survey 
of the whole group. On January 16, 1820, he landed on the largest 
island (King George Island) in the centre of the group and took 
possession formaüy in the name of King George IV. After a voyage 
, 
south-westwards between the South Shetlands and Graham Land, 
to which further reference is made in paragraph IO below, he retumed 
to the South Shetland Islands. On February 4 he landed on the most 
easterly island of the group, taking possession formally in the King's 
name and calling the island Clarence Island in honour of the Duke of 
Clarence, the brother of the King. 
g. The Sozrth Orkney Islands (named after another Scottish group) 
were discovered by the British sealing captain, George Powell, on 
December 6, 1821. On the following day he landed on the largest of 
the islands, took possession of it formally in the name of King 
George IV and called it Coronation Island in honour of the King's 
Coronation. 
10. Graham Land, the northern extremity of the Antarctic con- 
tinent, was first discovered on January 30, 1820, by E. Bransfield, 
R.N., in the course of the voyage of exploration soiith-westwards 
from the South Shctlands nhich was mentioned iii yaragraph 8 

52 
APPLICATION IXSTITUTING PROCEEDIXGS (Y 55) 
above. He sighted,. in hazy weather, the outline of parts of the 
Antarctic mainland and one or two coastal islands. He named the 
land Trinity Land in compliment to the Board of Triiiity House (the 
British institution responsible for pilotage and maritime lights), and 
he named two of the coastal islands, Hope Island and Tower Island, 
respectively. He also traced the outline of the Antarctic mainland 
and coastal islands, as he had seen them, on the chart which he drew 
of the South Shetlands and forwarded to the British Admiralty. 
Soon afterwards, further sightings of the Antarctic peninsula or its 
coastal islands were reported by British and American sealers, by 
the Russian navigator Admira1 Bellinghausen, and by the French 
navigator, Captain D'Urville, but the first sighting was that of 
E. Bransfield, R.N. In 1829, Captain H. Foster, R.N., in H.M.S. 
Chaizticleer, effected a landing on one of the coastal islands, Hosea- 
son Island off West Graham Land, and deposited there a copper 
cylinder in which was a document taking possession in the name of 
King George IV. On February 21, 1832, the British sealing captain, 
John Biscoe, landed on an island of the Palmer Archipelago, believ- 
ing it to be part of the mainland, and took possession formally in the 
name of King William IV, calling the territory Graham Land, by 
which name the peninsula is known to-day, in honour of Sir James 
Graham, then First Lord of the British Admiralty. On January 6, 
1843, Captain J. C. Ross, R.N., commanding H.M.S. Erebus and 
H.M.S. Terror, penetrated into a gulf on the eastern side of the 
peninsula and landed on a coastal island. He named the gulf Erebus 
and Terror Gulf, and the island James Ross Island, and took pos- 
session of the island together with its "contiguous lands" for the 
British Crown. 
II. The first discoveries of South Georgia, the South Sandwich 
Islands, the South Orkneys, the Sonth Shetlands, and Graham Land 
were thus al1 made by British nationals-a 
fact reflected in the 
names given to these territones by which they have been known, 
and have figured in maps and charts, ever since. The same applies 
to Coats Land, as to which see paragraph 14 below. Some discoveries 
of particular parts of these principal groups of territory were made 
by explorers or seamen of other nationalities ; but the initial dis- 
covenes of al1 five principal groups were British. There were no 
Spanish or Chilean discoveries. Furthermore, during this early 
penod in Antarctic history from 1678 to 1643. acts of annexation 
were peiformed in the name of the British Crown at places ashore 
within al1 the principal groups except the South Sandwich Islands, 
where, frequently, the local conditions render landing impossible. 
On the other hand, during this period 110 acts of annexation were 
performèd in any of the territories concerned on behalf of any other 
State. 

12. The facts stated in paragraphs 6 to II above show that from 
very early dates varying between 1775 and 1843, Great Britain 
possessed, on the basis of discovery, accompanied by a formal claim 
in the name of the British Crown, an original root of title to al1 the 
territories concemed. 
Display of British Sovereignty in or in regard to the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies in the Period 1843 to July 21, 1908 
13. In pursuance of a British Act of Parliament (6 Victoria, 
Chapter 13-BritishandForeignStatePapers, 
Volume31, page IZII), 
Royal Letters Patent were issned on June 23, 1843, making provi- 
sion for the government of the "Settlements in the Falkland Islands 
and their Dependencies" (Annex I hereto, No. 3). Supplemental 
Letters Patent were issued on Aprilz8, 1876, making further provi- 
sion for the governmeiit of the "Settlements in the Falkland Islands 
and their Dependencies". On Febmary 25, 1892, fresh Letters Patent 
were accordingly issued by which the Government of the "Settle- 
ments in the Falkland Islands and their Dependencies" was design- 
ated as the Government of a Crown Colony (British and Foreign 
State Papers, Volume 84, page 262). Similarly, the Commission 
issued to the new Governor in November, 1847 (Annex I hereto. 
No. 4). and the ten succeeding Commissions to Govemors issued 
between that date and 1908. were in the form of an appointment 
covering "the Falkland Islands and their Dependencies". Again, 
numerous laws passed by the Falkland Islands Govemment during 
the period 1843-July 21, 1908, were made for "the Falkland Islands 
and their Depentlencies" '. The particular temtories comprised in 
the "Dependencies of the Falkland Islands" were not named in the 
various Letters Patent, Governor's Commissions, or laws of the 
Falkland Islands Government. The Colonial Office Year Book, how- 
ever, began in 1887 to specify South Georgia as one of the Depend- 
encies. There had been comparatively little whaling and similar 
activity in the Antarctic in the middle of the nineteenth century, 
but from 1892 onwards whaling, sealing and scientific exploration 
began to revive. This renewed activity called for a corresponding 
exercise of State authority in the Antarctic and led very soon to 
special provision being made by Great Britain for the governmeiit 
of the five principal territories as Dependencies of the Falkland 
Islands and to their forma1 constitution as the Falkland Islands 
Dependencies. 
14. The Antarctic revival in the area now in dispute hegan with 
the voyage of four Scottish vessels in 1892 to the eastem side of 
Graham Land and the Weddell Sea for whaling and sealing. In the 
same year a Nomregian whaling expedition which went to the 
4 As regards the nature of the connexion bet\reeo the Falkland Islands and the 
Dependencies. see footnate 2 to paragraph 2 ahove. 

54 
APPLICATIOY IXSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
Weddell Sea, called at the South Orkneys, and further Norwegian 
expeditions in 1893 and 1894 visitcd the South Shetlands and 
Graham Land. In 1897 and 1901 respectively, Belgian and Swedish 
scientific expeditions went to the South Shetlands-Graham Land 
area, and in 1902 they were followed by a Scottish scientific expedi- 
tion under Dr. IV. S. Bruce in the S.S. Scotin. Dr. Bruce established 
a meteorological station at Laurie Island in the South Orkneys in 
1903, the working of which was entrusted to the Argentine meteor- 
ological office in the following year. He spent the Antarctic winter 
of 1903 at Laune Island and in 1904, after revisiting Laurie Island 
to lancl the Argentine meteorologists, he penetrated deep into the 
Weddell Sea, discovering Conts L a d  (named after a Scottish sup- 
porter of the expedition) which is now the eastern frontier of the 
Falkland lslands Dependencies on the Antarctic continent. 
r j .  In 1904 the Xorwegian whaling expert, Captain Larsen. 
formed a Company in Buenos -4ires. the Compania Argentina de 
Pesca. for the purpose of whaling in the -4ntarcticand established 
a shore whaling station at South Georgia. In 1905, a Chilean com- 
paiiy, the South Georgia Exploration Company, financed by British 
subjccts in Chile, was grantcd a mining and grazing lease of South 
Georgia by the Governor of the Falkland Islands and proceeded 
there, only to find Captain Larsen's Compania Argentina de Pesca. 
already in occupation of the best site for a base. Meanwhile, the 
Captain had applied through the British Legation in Buenos Aires 
to the British Government in London for a whaling licence for 
South Georgia. The British Government, leaming that another 
licence had previously been granted by the Govemor, despatched 
H.M.S. Sapfiho to South Georgia to investigate the situation on the 
spot. The result was that a whaling licence was granted by the 
Governor to the Argentine company, and the Chilean company then 
abandoned its project. In the same year, 1905, Norwegian whalers 
visited South Georgia and the South Shetlands, taking with them 
the first whale-factory ship employed in the Antarctic. In connexion 
with this enterprise, the Norwegian Governmcnt addressed an 
inquiry to the British Government conceming the sovereignty of 
territories in the area between longitude 35" and 80" West and 
latitudes 45" and 6j0 South, i.~., in the area covering South Georgia, 
the South Shetlands, the South Orkneys and the northem part of 
Graham Land. The British Government replied that the South 
Shetlands were not international but ivere British possessions as 
were also South Georgia, the South Orkneys and Graham Land (the 
South Sandwich Islands lie outside the area of the Norwegian 
inquiry) and that Norwegian whalers should apply to the Governor 
of the Falkland Islands for any facilities that they might nced. 

55 
;\PPLIC:\TIO'I 
INSTITU.TING PROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
16. In riew of these developments, the Falkland Islands Govern- 
ment promulgated a whaling ordinance in 1906 (Ordinance No. 3 
of 1906) by which the taking of whales without licence was made 
unlawful, aiid a royalty was made payable in respect of each whale 
caught under licence from that Govemment. It was furtherconsid- 
ered desirable, in view of the increasing importance of the five 
principal temtories as whaling and sealing bases, to make specific 
provision for their government and to make more specific provision 
for their government as dependencies of the Falkland Islands. 
i\ccortlinglj. on IiiIy 21, igoS, :is rïciic.il iii ~,:ir:igr:ipli 2 nbo!.~. 
Soiitli Gt?orcia. ttic Soiitti Urkne\.s. the Soiitli Shetlnii~ls. thc Snnd- 
wich ~slandvs ind the temtorydof Graham Land weri by Royal 
Letters Patent formally constituted Dependencies of the Colony 
of the Falkland Islands and placed under its government. Under 
these Letters Patent .(Annex I hereto, No. 1) it \vas provided 
that :- 
(a) the Governor of the Colony should be the Governor also of 
the Dependencies and be invested with the same powers 
of govemment and legislation in respect of them as he 
shonld from time to time possess in the Colony ; 
(b) the Executive Council of the Colony should act also as the 
Executive Council of the Dependencies ; 
(c) the Governor should have. and be deemed always tu have 
had, power by and with the advice and consent of the 
Legislative Council of the Colony. to make laws for the 
peace, order and good govemment of the Dependencies ; 
(d) the Goveriior should have, and be deemed always to have 
had, power to make grants and dispositions of land 
within the Dependencies in the name of the Crown. 
The dekition of the lands comprised in the Falkland Islands 
Dependencies, as mentioned in paragraph 2 above, was afterwards 
amended by Letters Patent of March 28, 1917, so as to include 
explicitly al1 islands and territories situated between longitudes 
zoo and 50" West, and south of latitude 50" South ; and al1 islands 
and territories situated between longitudes 50' and 80" West, 
and south of latitude 58" South. The lines of longitude and latitude 
laid down in these Letters Patent as dehing the temtories com- 
pnsed within the Falkland Islands Dependencies are indicated in 
red on the map exhibited as Annex 2 of this Application 
Referencc is again made to fwtnote z to paragraph 2. 

56 
APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS (V j 5) 
Display of British Sovereignty in or in Regard to the Dependencies 
in the Period July 21, 1908-September 22, 1938 
17. Great Britain's title to the islaiids and territories of the 
Dependencies was thus formally confirmed and defiried by the issue 
of the Letters Patent of 1908 and 1917, but, as has been shown, 
it did not originate in or depend on these Letters Patent, and had 
been in existence for many decades previously. This title was now 
consolidated and maintained hy a further effective display and 
cxercise of British sovereignty. In pursuance of the authority 
contained in the Letters Patent of 1908, a Falkland Islands Ordi- 
nance was promulgated in that year under which the Governor 
in Council was empowered to declare any law passetl for the Colony 
to be applicable also in the Dependencies so far as might be appro- 
priate to their circumstances. Under this principal Ordinance 
numerous laws were either made or made applicable to the Depend- 
encies by the Govemor in Council, covering, inter alia, the adminis- 
tration of civil and criminal justice, marriage, testacy and intestacy, 
&c., and constituting a full and sufficient corpus of laws for those 
temtories, having regard to their particular circumstances. 
18. Especially important are the laws made by the Falkland 
Islands Government for whaling and sealing, \<,hich provide convinc- 
ing proof of the effectiveness of Great Britain's display and exercise 
of sovereignty in the Dependencies. In 1908 the whaling Ordinance 
of 1906 referred to in paragraph 16 above was repealed, and replaced 
by a new Ordinance. This principal whaling Ordinance of 1908, as 
amended by later Ordinances, together with the Regulations made 
under it, established a detailed and comprehensive code of whaling 
law for the Dependencies, as can be seen from the summary of the 
whaling laws in force in the Dependencies in 1920 which is contained 
in the report of an officia1 cornmittee presented to the British Parlia- 
ment in that year (Command PaPer No. 657). The relevant extract 
from this report is annexed to this Application (Annex 1 hereto, 
No. 5). It shows that one of the chief objects of the legislation was 
the conservation of stocks by regulating the number and tonnage 
of whaling vessels, the number of whaling licences, the number 
of whales to be taken by each licence-holder, by protecting whale 
calves and by other measures. Analogous, if somewhat less elaborate, 
laws were introduced in 1909 for the regulation of sealing in the 
Dependencies. These laws made it unlawful to take seals in the 
Dependencies without a licence, gave anthority for the issue of 
licences, and provided for the creation of a close season and of seal 
reserves. 

57 
APPLICATION INSTITUTIKG PROCEEDINGS (V 55) 
19. The above-mentioned whaling and sealing laws were actively 
and extensively applied in the Dependencies. For whaling-licence 
purposes, as appears from the summary of laws given in Annex I, 
No. 5, the Dependencies were divided into four units-South 
Georgia, the South Shetlands together with Graham Land, the 
South Orkneys and South Sandwich Islands. 
(1) I n  the case of South Georgia, the Buenos Aires company 
mentioned in paragraph 15 above, the Compania Argentina de 
Pesca, was granted a lease of 500 acres of land at an annual rent 
of £250 for 21 years from January 1, 1906, and obtained an addi- 
tional lease of land in 1909. Seven other companies, four Norwegian 
and three British, were granted whaling leases between 1908 and 
1911 on terms similar to those given to the Argentine company. 
Applications for further leases in South Georgia were refused in 
order to conserve whale stocks. The whaling companies concerned, 
in addition to their leases, were required to take out whaling licences 
for South Georgia which were renewable annually. In 1910 the 
Argentine company took out, in addition, a sealing licence, and 
after that year South Georgia was divided into four areas for sealing 
purposes, three being let out on licence each year and the fourth 
being left vacant 'as a seal reserve. An additional place was made 
into a seal reserve in 1918. 
(2) I n  the case of the South Shetlands and Grahatn Land, a licence 
to take whales in their territorial waters was granted to a Chileau 
company in 1907, and a similar licence was granted in 1908 to a 
Nedoundland company. By the season of 1912-13, 
there were 
12 factory ships and 32 catchers of various companies working 
in the South Shetlands area, al1 holding licences from the Falkland 
Islands Govemment. In 1912 a Nonvegian company, the Hektor 
Whaling Company, was granted a 21 years' lease of a site on Decep- 
tion Island for a w,haling station but, in the absence of other suitable 
sites, the remaining companies operated with factory ships moored 
at Deception Island or, occasionally, at King George Island. From 
that date, whaling companies operated in the territorial waters of 
the South Shetlands and Graham Land under licence from the 
Falkland Islands Government every year witholit interruption, 
even during the first world war, until 1930, when developments 
in pelagic whaling led them to conduct their operations on the high 
seas. Activity in these two territories has been practically confined 
to whaling, although one sealing licence was issued in 1913 with 
respect to Graham Land. 

9 
AFPI,ICATIOK ISSTITUTIKG PROCEEDISGS (V jj) 
(3) I n  the case of the Soi6th Orkiceys, the first whaliiig licence \vas 
granted in 1908 to the Newfoundland Steam Whaling Company. 
Other companies applied for licences, and in the 1914-15 season 
four Norwegian companies were granted licences. Whaling ceased 
during the remainder of the first world war, but in 1920 a Norlvegian 
company, the AIS Tonsbcrg Hvalfaiigeri, \vas granted a lease of 
500 acres on Signy Island for a shore whaling station. A further 
whaling lease for.the South Orkneys \vas granted in 1925 but9by 
1930 pelagic whaling had made it unnecessary for whalers to coiiduct 
their operations in territorial waters, and applications for licences 
ceased. One sealing licence \vas also issued for the South Orkneys 
in 1913. 
. . 
(4) In the case of the Sonth Sandwich Islands, where access to 
the land is estremely difficult, whaliiig activity has been less 
frequent. In 1912, sis Nonvegiaii companies took out licences 
from the Falkland Islands C;overnment, and in 1927 the Tonsbirg 
Company applied for and obtained a licence. In addition, a sealing 
licence was graiited in 1910 for the South Sandwich Islands to 
the Argentine company, the Compania Argentina de Pesca. 
20. British sovereignty has also been displayed and exercised 
in the Dependencies through magistrates commissioned by the 
Falkland Islands Government. 
(i) As eariy as 1909, a resideiit magistrate w s  sent to Sozrth 
Georgia, and there has been a British administration in that groiip 
continuously since that date. Customs and police officers were 
added to the magistrate's staff, and iii 1912 a post office \vas 
established at Grytviken. By 1925, the Govemment buildings 
included offices, a \vireless station and a marine laboratory in 
addition to dwelling houses. 
(ii) The South Shetlands and Grahanc Land, as inentioiied in 
paragraph 18 above, have been treated as a single unit for the 
purpose of the whale fishery, a single licence being graiited to 
cover both these temtories. The whaling companies normally 
made their base first at Deception Island in the South Shetlands. 
If the season was favourablc, thcy movcd southwards through 
the Bransfield Strait and established a forward base in the Palmer 
Archipelago either in the Melchior Islands or at Port Lockroy. 
But Port Foster at Deception Island is the most convenient 
starting point for operations in the Bransfield Strait and off 
Graham Land, and it \vas accordingly made by law a "port of 
entry" for shipping visiting the area. A resident British magistrate 
was sent to Port Foster every summer season from 1910 to 1930, 
and this officia1 exercised jurisdictioii over al1 whaling vessels 
operating in the waters either of the South Shetlands or of Graham 

59 
.4PPLICATIOS ISSTITUTISG PROCEEDIXGS (\' 55) 
Land and its coastal islands. From 1912 to 1930 a post office was 
inaintained by the magistrate at Port Foster. 
(iii) At the South Orkneys whaling activity \vas somewhat less 
frequent than at South Georgia and the South Shetlands, with 
the result that the visits of British magistrates were correspondingly 
less regular. But in 1913 a Customs Officer spent two months in 
the islands supervising the observance of the whaling laws, while 
a special Whaling Officer spent about three months there both 
in 19x4 and 1915. Nest, the South Georgia magistrate went to 
Signy Island in 1921 to inspect the site which the Tonsherg Hval- 
fangen Company proposed to lease, and in the following year a 
Whaling Officer spent three months at Signy to ensure that the 
terms of the lease and the whaling laws were carried out by the 
Company. In the three seasons 1925-26, 1926-27 and 1927-28, 
a Whaling Officer again spent three months in the South Orkneys. 
Iii 1928 the Governor of the Falkland Islands himself visited Signy 
lsland to inspect the area leased to the Tonsherg Hvalfangeri 
Company. 
(iv) The comparati\rely slight whaling activity at the almost 
inaccessible Sozith Sandwich Islands has called for very little 
exercise of administrative authority at the islands themselves '. 
21. The cessation of certain facilities and activities after 1930 
came abolit as follows. The introduction between 1925 and 1930 
of pelagic whaling with large whale factory ships, enabled the 
whaling companies to conduct their operations on the high seas 
without the use of hases ashore or in coastal waters. The result 
\vas that after 1930 the companies, in order to avoid payment 
of the licence fees imposed by the Falkland Islands Govemment, 
ceased to take out licences for operating from bases in the various 
Dependencies-(licences 
continued to be taken out by the com- 
panies with permanent bases in South Georgia). But; although in 
conseqnence there was some diminution in the administrative 
activity of the Falkland Islands Govemment with regard to the 
whaling vessels themselves, British State activity in the Depend- 
encies continued in full force and without interruption in the 
period between 1930 ancl the outbreak of the second world war. 
During this penod, the Ilependencies were estensively visited and 
surveyed by the vessels of the Discovery Cornmittee, an official 
body responsible to the Secretary of State for the Colonies. As 
early as 1917, pmposals had been made for a thorough investigation 
' Coats Land (see paragraphs 14 and 1 5  above) is also not discusçed here in an. 
further detail, only very recent Argentine action Iiaving hrought this tenitory into 
question (see parapaph 4 above). 

60 
APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDISGS (V 55) 
into the economic resources of the Dependencies, and a Committee 
had been set up to report on the preservation of the whaling 
industry, the possibilities of developing other industries, and the 
needs of scientific research. Following the presentation of this 
Committee's report to the United Kingdom Parliament in 1920, 
a permanent Cornmittee known as the Discovery Committee was 
established in 1923 under the direction of the Secretary of State 
for the Colonies. The principal function of this Committee, under 
its terms of reference, \vas to conduct research into the economic 
resources of the -4ntarctic and sub-Antarctic regions, with speciai 
reference to the Falkland Islands Dependencies. But its functions 
also included coastal surveys and general scientific research into 
the oceanography, weather and ice conditions and flora and fauna 
of the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic regions. Between 1925 and 
1939 the Committee's research ships, Discovery I (one commission), 
Discovery II (five corninissions) and Williana Scoresby (seven 
commissions) made very extensive investigations of the Depend- 
encies. Numerous voyages among the principal territories of the 
Dependencies were made by these ships on each commission, and 
detailed surveys were made of their coasts and coastal waters. 
As a result, the Dependencies during this period were covered 
literally by a network of patrols undertaken by the Discovery 
Committee. The main focus of the Comrnittee's research was on 
the natural history of whales, the rnost important economic 
resonrce of the Dependencies, and especially intensive observations 
were made on the whaling groiinds of South Georgia, the South 
Shetlands and Graham Land. But the Committee also collected 
yery extensive information on the hydrography and biology of 
the Dependencies, on the navigation and charting of their waters, 
and on. Antarctic ice and ice-navigation. A large and important 
body of scientific matenal has been published by the Committee 
in the 27 volumes of "Discovery Reports", and its research on the 
natural history of whales is admitted by expert opinion to have 
niade a vital contribution towards the effective solving of the 
international problem of the conservation of whale fisheries. 
22. In addition, a large-scale expedition, the British Grahafn 
 and Expedition, visited the southem parts of the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies in 1934-37 to make land investigations. 
Reaching Deception Island late in 1934. the expedition proceeded 
to Port Lockroy in the Palmer Archipelago in January 1935: 
Shortly afterwards, a base was established and occupied further 

south, and from there various sledge and plane journeys were 
made whch threw much fresh light on the geography of the area. 
In February, 1936, the expedition moved still fiirther to the 
south to Marguerite Bay and established a base on the Debenham 
Islands. From therc, important sledge journeys were made across 
Graham Laiid to the east coast and far soiithwards into King 
George VI Sound. Niimerous reconnaissance flights were carried 
out, and the expcdition ascertained conclusively for the first time 
that Graham Land is attached to the Antarctic mainland. 
23. Other examples of the display of British sovereignty in or 
in regard to the Dependencies dunng the period July 21, 1908- 
September 22, 1938, are mentioued in the three next succeeding 
paragraphs of this Application dealing with the recognition of the 
British claims by Norxi~ay, Argentina and Chile. Still further 
examples could be cited. The facts given in paragraphs 16-22 
above and in paragraph 24 below, however, are by themselves 
sufficient to establish conclusively a continuous and peaceful 
display of British sovereignty in and in regard to the territories 
of the Ilependeiicies during the period July 21, 1908-Septem- 
ber 22, 1938, which is that reviewed in the present section. 
Recognition of the British Claims by Norway, Argentina and Chie 
after the Issue of the Letters Patent of July 21, 1908 
24.-(1) 
The existence of British claims, not only to South 
Georgia but to other territones in Antarctic and sub-Antarctic 
regions was known in Norwny before the formal constitution of 
the five principal territories as Dependencies of the Falkland 
Islands by the Letters Patent of 1908. The Norwegian Government, 
as stated in paragraph 15 above, addressecl an enquiry to Great 
Britain in 1905 concerning the sovereignty of the territories situated 
between 35' and 80" West. and was informed in reply that South 
. 
Georgia, the South Orkneys, the South Shetlands and Graham 
Land were British possessions. When Norway made a further 
enquiry in 1907, Great Britain reasserted her claim. Norway, 
neither then nor after the issue of the Letters Patent of 1908, 
made any protest or reservation against the assertion and exercise 
of British sovereignty over the Dependencies. At the same time 
numerous Nonvegian whaling companies took out British licences 
and otherwise complied with the laws of the Falkland lslands 
Governmeiit. These facts establish by implication Nonvay's 
recognition of British sovereignty over the Dependencies in or 
about 1908. This implication is completely confirmed by the 
Nonvegian Proclamation of January 14, 1939, in which the western 
bouiidary of Norway's own Antnrctic claim \vas defined by a line 

62 
APPLICATION INSTITUTING PHOCEEDINGS (V 55) 
coinciding with the eastem boundary of the Falkland Islands 
Dependencies. It \!,as further expressly stated in the Proclamation 
that the area named the Falkland Islands Dependencies had been 
broiight iinder Great Britain's dominion in rgoX. 
(2) The existence of British claims to at least some of the 
Dependencies was also well known in Argentina before the issue 
of the Letters Patent of 1908. It has been mentioned above 
(paragraph 15) that as early as 1906 an Argentine Company, the 
Compania Argentina de Pesca. took out a British lease of land 
in South Georgia for 21 years. Indeed, it was the then Director of 
Armame~its of the .4rgeiitine Mi~iistry of Ilfarine who, in his cafiacity 
as technical adviser 10 the comfiany, visited the British Legation in 
Buenos Aires to apply for the lease. In the same year Great Britain, 
in order ta remove any possible misconception as to the legal basis 
on which operation of the meteorological station on Laurie Island 
in the South Orkneys had been transferred to the Argentine 
Meteorological Office (see paragraph 14 above), addressed a note 
to the Argentine Government emphasising that the islands were 
a British possessioii. This reservation of the British sovereignty 
over the South Orkneys was repeated to Argentina in January 
1907. Shortly aftenvards, when Chile proposed to Argentina the 
negotiation of a treaty dividing between the two countries "the 
islands and the rimericari Antarctic continents", the Argentine 
Foreign ilfinister, in rejecting the proposal, said expressly that 
"Chile ought to know that England claimed al1 these lands". In 
1908, after the issue of the Letters Patent formally constituting 
the Falkland Islands Dependencies, the Argentine Foreign Minister 
asked to be informed of the terms of the British "declaration". 
Accordingly, the British Ninister in Buenos Aires in a note of 
February 20, 1909, transmitted to the Argentine Foreign Minister 
a copy of the Falkland Islands Gazette containing the text of the 
Letters Patent. The Argentine Foreign Miiiister replied in a note 
of March 18, 1909 :- 
''1 have the pleasure of acknowledging the receipt of your Note 
dated the 20th of February last with which you were good enough 
to fonvard a publication called Falklaitd Islaitds Gazette containing 
a Decree by which the 'South Orkneys' are declared a dependency 
of the 'Falkland Islands'. 
While thanking you for this attention, 1 am happy ta renew to 
you the assurances of my high consideration." 
The British Minister, in communicating this reply to the British 
Foreign Office, commented that he concluded from its t e m s  that 

63 
APPLICATION INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS (v 55) 
"Argentine Government do not dispute the rights of Great Britain 
over the South Orkneys". A fortiori it is to be concluded from 
the terms of her reply that in 1909 Argentina did not dispute 
the British title to South Georgia, the South Sandwich Islands, 
the South Shetlands and Graham Land, which territories were 
also covered by the communication sent to the Argentine Govern- 
ment, but were not mentioned in the Argentine reply '. Three 
years later, negotiations were beguu for the cession by Great 
Britain to Argentina, of the South Orkneys in return for a Legation 
site in Buenos Aires and on condition of respecting any existing 
Bntish whaling rights. By 19x4, the final text of a treaty of 
cession had been agreed hetween the two countries but, on a 
change of Government in Argentina, the new Government declined 
on financial grounds to complete the transaction. The terms of 
this draft treaty provide further evidence of Argentina's recognition 
of the British title of the South Orkneys at this time, rcotwithstanding 
the presence of the Argentine tneteorological station on Laurie Island. 
Again, Argentina made no protests or reservations against the 
issue of the British Letters Patent of 1917. Nor did she make any 
protests or reservations against the promulgation of British Laws 
for the Dependencies, nor against the application of those laws 
to the Argentine company, the Compania Argentina de Pesca, 
and to other foreign companies. Nor did she make any protests 
or reservations against the exercise of authority by Bntish magis- 
trates in the several territories of the Falkland Islands Depend- 
encies and, in particular, in the South Orkneys, South Shetlands 
and Graham Land. These facts establish beyond question that 
at this period Argentina recognised Bntish sovereignty over the 
Dependencies. 
(3) The existence of British -claims at least to soine of the 
Uependencies was equally known in Chile, even before the issue 
of the Letters Patent of 1908. Three years earlier, in 1905, a 
Chilean company, as stated in paragraph 15 above, applied for 
a British lease of land in South Georgia from the Falkland Islands 
Government. In 1907. another Chilean company, the Sociedad 
Ballenera de Magallanes of Punta Arenas, took out a British 
whaling licence for the South Shetlands and Graham Land. In 
the same year, when Chile iuvited Argentina to negotiate a division 
of "the islands and American Antarctic continents", she was 
expressly warned by Argentina that "England claimed al1 these 
lands". Neither then nor after the issue of the Letters Patent of 
' It seerns clear in fact that Argentine interest at that date hardly extended 
beyond the South Orkneys, where the Argentine meteoiological sttition was situated. 

64 
APPLICATION INSTITUTIKG PROCEEDINGS (v 55) 
1908 or of 1917 did Chile make any protest or reservation against 
the assertion and exercise of British sovereignty over the Depend- 
encies. She maintained a Consular Officer in the Falkland Islands, 
but at no time did she make any representations either to the 
Government of Great Britain or to the Falkland Islands Govern- 
ment in regard to the Letters Patent, or to the promulgation of 
British laws for the Dependencies, or to the application of those 
laws to the Chilean company, the Sociedad Ballenera de Magallanes, 
and to other foreign companies. Nor did she make any protests 
or reservations against the exercise of authority by British magis- 
trates in the several territories of the Falkland Islands Depend- 
encies and, in particular, in thesouth Shetlands and Graham 
Land. Al1 these facts establish beyond question that at this period 
Chile recognised British sovereignty over. the Dependencies. 
25. The facts recitcd in the three immediately preceding sub- 
paragraphs show conclusively that, during the years at the be- 
ginning of the present century, when Great Britain was confirming 
and consolidating her ancient titles to the Dependencies, Nonvay, 
the State principally interested in Antarctic whaling, and Argentina 
and Chile, made no reservations in regard to Great Britain's 
display and exercise of State activity in those territones. They 
further show that these three States in fact recognised Great 
Britain's sovereignty over the Dependencies. Nor did any other 
State during this period make any reservations or enter any 
protests against the British claims. 
Announcement of Chile's Pretensions to the South Shetlands and 
Graham Land on November 6, 1940 
26. The Chilean Government, as related in paragraph 24 (3) 
above, made no protests or reservations in respect of the issue 
of the British Letters Patent of 1908, or those of 1917, or in 
respect of the frequent and public display of State authority by 
Great Britain in and in regard to the Dependencies. For more 
than 30 years after the issue of the Letters Patent of 1908, no 
interest was shown by the Chilean Govemment in the South 
Shetlands or Graham Land. The only Chilean interest in those 
territories during this period was that of the whaling company, 
the Sociedad Ballenera de Magallanes which, as mentioned in 
parag~aph 24 (3) above, took out British whaling licences for the 
two territories between 1907 and 1914, and conducted their 
operations under British laws and regulations. Although one of 
the principal objects of the important international conferences 

6.5 
APPLICATION IXSTITUTING PROCEEDIXGS (V 55) 
for the regulatioii of whaling held hetwecii 1927 aiid 1939 waj: 
the preservation of thc whale stocks in the seas siirrounding the 
Dependencies, and especially in the Bransfield Strait between the 
South Shetlands and Grahani Land, Chile neither tooli any part 
in those conferences nor acceded to the resulting conventions. 
which, if she had had sovereignty over these territories she might 
be expected to have done. Nor did she voice any objection to 
the fact that the United Kingdorn took a leading part in those 
conferences in its capacity as the State responsihle for the regulatioii 
of whaling in the I)ependencies, and especially in the Soutli 
Shetlands and Graham Land. It \Iras only after the otlthreak of 
the second worltl \var that the Chilean Government, by a decrec 
of Septernber 7, 1939, established a special coniinission to esamine 
into Chile's interests in the Antarctic. Thirteen rnonths later, thc 
Chilean Government issued the PresidentialI3ecree of Xovemher 6, 
1940, the text of which is given in paragraph 3 of the present 
Application, and by this decree laid claim, intev nli<i, to the Rritish 
territories of the Soutli Shetlands and Graliam Land. 
Rejection of the Chiiean Pretensions by the United ~ i n ~ d o h  
and 
Continued Display of British Sovereignty after November 6, 1940 
27. Tlic British Ambassador in Santiago, a fe\r days after the 
issue of the Presidential Decrec of November 6, 1940, drcw the 
attention uf the Chilean Governrnent to thc fact that Chilc's preteii- 
sions in the Antarctic encroached upon British tcrritory iii the Falk- 
land Islands Dependencies. Subsequently, in a diplomatic Xote of 
February 25, 1941, the United Kingdom Government lodgecl a 
formal protcst with the Chilean Government against the Presidential 
Decree, declaring that it could not rccognise that Decrec as con- 
ferring title on the Republic of Chile to any territory within the 
limits of the Falkland Islands Dependencies. 
2s: The C'nited Kingdom Govern~nent was, meanwhile, occupied 
in the North and South Atlantic in dealiiig with attacks by Axis 
naval forces on Allied and Neutra1 sea-borne trade ; and in March 
1941 despatched H.b.1.S. Queen of Ber+irztda to the South Shetlands 
to destroy oil tanks and stocks of ail left on Ueception Island by the 
Hektor Whaling. Company, one of the cornpanies holding a lease of 
land on that island from the British Crown. This measure, whicli 
was taken to deny the use of the oil tanks and fuel stocks to Axis~ 
raiders, constituted a most significant display and exercise of British 
sovereignty over the South Shetlands. In January 1943, another 
British warship, H.M.S. Cnrna~uoit Cnstle, \vas dispatched to the 

66 
.\I'I'I.ICATIOX 
INSTITIJTING PROCEEDINGS (\. jjj 
Soiith Orkneys aiid South Shetlands, to examine the apcliorages,in 
those temtories for any signs of use by enemy raiders, and toinvesti- 
gate rnmoiirs of purported acts of sovereignty there by the Argen* 
tine naval transport. Priwzero de Mayero. H.M.S. Carnaruon Castle; 
after visiting Signy and Laurie Islands in tlie South Orkneys, went 
to Deception Island in the South Shetlands and obliterated from thé 
u~alls of the Hektor Whaling Company's factory the national colours 
of Argentins \\,hich had apparently beenpainted there recently by 
the Primero de Mayero. -4 writ mas at the same time affixed to the 
huilding proclaiming that the compaiiy's lease had lapsed and that 
thc building \vas the property of the British Goverfiment. Soon after: 
wards, the Argentine Government was notified of the visit of H.BI.S, 
Carrzarzo?~ Castle to Deception Island and was informed that the 
United I<irigdom Government had iio intention of allolving the 
British tit'e to the islaiid to be usurped by Argentina. In Febriiar~ 
of the sanic year the Prinaero de Mayero was reported to be depart: 
ing again for tlit: Falkland Islands Dependencies, and to have twb 
Chilean naval officers on board. The British Ainbassador in Santiago 
on making represcntations to the Chileaii Go\~emmerit in regard to 
these officers, was informed that they were sailing in the Argentine 
ship inerely as observers and that the Chilean Governinent had itself 
protested agaiiist Argentine atteinpts to establish a claiin to Decep- 
tion Island B. 
29. The United Kingdoin Govcriiineiit, in view of the apparent 
intention of Argentins and Chile to disregard British territorial 
rights in the South Orkneys. South Shetlands and Graham Land: 
dispatclied H.M.S. Williatn Scoresby and S.S. Fitzroy to those terri- 
tories at the end of January, 1944. These ships visited the mainland' 
and coastal islaiids of Graham Land, Deception Island in the South 
Shetlands and .Signy Island in the South Orkneys. A permanent 
shore base waS esiablished at Deception Island and another at Port 
Lockroy in the Palmer Archipelago off the west coast of Grahain 
Land, meteorological stations being attached to both bases. Fiirther 
visits were paid by H.11.S. William Scoresbv to these two bases in 
3larch and, again, in April 1944. Magistrates were sworn in for the 
South Orkneys, South Shetlands and Graham Land, and a special 
series of postage stamps was issucd for the use of British estahlish- 
. .  . 
It wiil be oùsorvcd tliiit botii tliesi: States Iiad nui\, startad to lay çlaiiii to tIii 
saine Britisli territories (see separate hpplication rospecting t\rgentina)-a 
circuni; 
stance tiiat can hardly fail to reiiect a<lversel" on hot11 tlie motives and thc validily 
of hotli sets of claims. 

67 
.\PPI.ICATIOS ISSTITüTiSG t'K0CEEI)iSGS (\' jj) 
iiieiits in those temtones and iri Soiith Georgia. Sincc 1944 tlie 
United Kingdoni has niaintained a nurnher of British bases iii tho 
Dependencics, the follo\viiig being the hases (either constnicted o r  
re-estal~lished) in the temtories to whicli Chile advances pretensions 
and has made encroachnients: 
S«irlh Shetlnnds- 
Port Foster, Ilecel>tioii Islaiitl (1944) O .  
.Adiiiiralty Bay, King George Islantl (1947). 
n 
Graharii Lai~d uiui ifs Arcltipeln~os- 
Port Lockroy, Palmer .irchipelago ( 1 9 ~ ) .  
Hope Ray, Tnnity Pensiiisula (1945). 
Stonington Island, Marguerite Hay (1946). 
Barry Island, Del~enharn Islaiids (1946) lu. 
-4rgeiitiiie Islands (1997) ln. 
I)açe Bay, Triiiity Peninsiila (19j3). 
The tiiiited Liiogdoni Go\zernn~ïiit lias sciit slii1)s to the South 
Shetlands-Grahani Land area elver? Aiitarctic suiiinier since 1944 : 
and al1 the ahove bases, with the exception of that in the I>ebeiihani 
Islands, have been occupied either contiiiiiously or iiitcrinittently 
by British parties. A special organisation, The Fulkland Isluftds 
Depeqidencies Sz~fi,ey, \\.as set iip i ~ i  
1945 to adrninistcr thesc bases. 
together with three others iii the South Orkncys, and to sul)crvise 
their work. Linder its direction exteiisi\.c survcys and explorations 
were camed out in the Depeiideiicies. includiiig grountl survcys, over 
large stretches of tlic Gi-ahaham Land peniiisula, aiid iiicteorological 
stations were established. Sovereignty \vas also displayed in othôr 
ways as, for exaniple, by the aappointment of magistrates, the issue 
of postage stamps, and the lodging of yrotests bath locally and 
through the diplomatic channel against cncroachments by Chilcan 
and Argentine parties. Thus the United Kingdom Governinent has 
at aü times taken ail such steps as were open to it in the circuni- 
stances to assert and maintain its title. 
Chie's Persistence in the Pretensions Advanced in the Presidential 
Decree of November 6, 1940, and Her wbsequent Physical 
'' 
Encroachments on the British Territories of the South Shetlands 
and Graham Land 
30. ln a Note to the United Kingdom Govarninent of Septcin- 
ber 29, 1944. the Chiiean Government, in conriexioii with the issue 
Headquarters of British Magistrates, 1910-30. 
'" Ruilt and oecupied by the British Graham Land Expedition, igjg-j7. 

68 
AI~PI.ICATION LNSTITUTING PKOCI)iL»INGS (V jj) 
of British postage stamps for the South Shetlands and Grahaiii 
Land, drew attention to the fact that thcsc tcrritories were covered 
by the terms of the Chilean Decree of Xovcmber 6,1940. In a fiirther 
Note of January 23, 1946, the Chilean Government at lcngth replied 
to the United Kingdom's protest of Fcbriiary 25, 1941. against the 
clairiis apparently madc by Chie in that Decrec to British terri- 
tories. The Chilean C;ovcrnment contended, inter nliu. that it had 
never been officially notified of the text of the British Letters Patent 
of 1917, and that the regions in question had always beeii held to be 
Chilean oii geographical, juridical, historical, diploniatic and admiii- 
istrative grotinds. Mention \vas also inade of an award giveii by 
His Najesty King Edward \'II in 1902, in a bounda~y arhitration 
betwecn Argeiitiiia and Cliilc, in consequeiicc of mhich, it was stated, 
thc regioiis iiow in qucstioii had bccn coiisidered by Chilc as iiicor- 
porated in hcr iiational economy, and she had issu<:<l various- 
unspecificd-decrees 
relatiiig to "occupatioii, fishing rights, Brc.". 
In a Note of Xoveinber I I ,  1946, the Uriitcct Kingdom Govcrn~nent 
replied to the Chilean asscrtions, pointing out, inter d i a .  that :- 
(1) The British Letters Patent of 1917 ivere by their natucc open 
and public documents, and had in fact been published in the 
Falklnrtd Islnmis Guetet, and in the British a i ~ d  Foreign 
Stnte Papers (Volume III, pages 16-17). 
(2) The United Kingdom's attitude was in no way basetl solely 
on the Letters I'atent of 1917, but also on the long-standing 
responsibilities wliich it had assumed for the administration 
of the temtories, for the equitablc control of whaling and 
sealing, and for the accumulation of scientific and meteoro- 
logical data. The only recordcd Chilean entcrprisc in the 
area in question had operatcd entirely under Kritisli licence. 
(3) The alleged "geographical grouiitls" for a Chile;rii title were 
without aiiy hasis in international law, and werc in contra- 
diction witli thedecision in the Islaiidof Pfllr~ins arhitration. 
(4) Haviiig regard to ziccepted usage ;uid law, British tliscoveries, 
British scientific investigatioiis in the area, British adiniiiis- 
trative activity and the continiiity of the British display 
of the fuiictions of a State, al1 "jiiridical", "historic" and 
"administrative" factors \voiild scem to point iiiireservedly 
to British sovcreigiity. 

(5) The hoiiiidary arbitratioii of 1902 hct\veeii tlrgciitiiia aiid 
Chile related solely to the continent of America, aiid iii the 
course of it iiothiiig \\,as ever said by eithei- part!. ahoiit 
clnims to t\iitarctic territory. 
For the purposes of the presciit Application, it suffices to add that 
in the subsequeiit dil>loinatic correspoiideiice the United Kingdom 
and Chile have maiiitaiiied their respective positions. 
31. The Chileaii Goveriiinent, however, has iiot reniained coiiteiit 
with challeiiging the Uiiited Kingdom's titles to the South Shetlands 
and Grahani Land iii dipfomatic corrcspoiidence. It has proceeded 
to establish in these British territories the following Chilean posts :- 
South Shetlaiids-llisco\rery 
Bay, Greenwich Islaiid (1947). 
-Pendulum 
Covc, Deception Island (xgjj) ". 
Grahaiii ~ a i ; d  -Cape 
Legoupil, Trinity Peiiinstila (1948). 
-Paradise 
Harhour (1951). 
Protcsts agaiiist tliesc Cliilcaii ciiçroachiiiciits on 13ntish territory 
have been lodged by tlit: Uiiited I<ingd«m, hoth throiigh the diplii- 
matic chaiinel, aiid Iiically I)y oficials of the British admiiiistration 
in the Falkland Islaiids 1)epeiidciicies. The Chileaii Governinent 
has nevertheless inairitaiiiecl the ahove-inentioned posts in the 
South Shetlaiids aiid Grahaiii Laiid, aiid lias repeatedly stated or 
manifestcd its iiiteiitioii to coiitiiiue to disregard the United Kirig- 
doni's prior aiid IveIl estahlished legal titles tn those territorics. 
32. III the opiiiioii of the tiiiitetl I<iiigdorii G«veriiineiit, these 
Chilean acts, takeii togethei-. aiid related to the coiiiplete nl>seiice 
of aiiy Chileaii claiiii prior to 1940, aiid to the pre\-ions coiiipletc 
Chilean indifference 10, aiid cveii recogiiitiori of, the British claim. 
are evideiice of a quite receiit aiid cleliherate and coiisidei-ed policy 
of infiltration on the part of the Chileaii Govemment directed 1c.1 
creating a semhlaiicc or fictioii of Chileaii sovereignty, and to plncing 
that Goreriiiiient in a position, after a sufficient lapsc of timc. to 
argue that aiiy previous British sovereignty was no\\. rcplnced 
or overlaid by Cliileaii sovereigntv. In effect, this is a policy of 
iisiirpntion. 
. 
~~ 
" The rïry recïnt cliaractrr oi this çncroachmenr =.il1 be nrited. ,\ri iittempt i n  
February 1gj3. to establish a Chilean hut ou the actual grouiid of the existing 
Rritish base ori Deception Islari<l met ivitli forcible reiiatance (see fmtnotc r )  to 
pnrap-aph 36 below). 

7" 
AFL'I.ICX~IOX INS~I'TUTISC. I'HOCERI)IXGS (Y jj) 
. . 
Cimited Relevance in Point of Law of Events after November 6: 1940 
' .  . 
33. The :rets uf the I'arties after Xovciiiber 6, 1940. are of limited 
relevance for t\vo reasons. First. the dispute crysiallisetl iii or 
ibout Xoveinber, 1940. when Chile iirst asserted her claim i aiid 
iïccording to \rrell-cstablished priiiciples of la\\-, it is at the date of 
crystallisatii)~~ 
that the rights of the parties arc to be adjodgcil. 
The siihseiluciit acts of the Chilcaii Governinent were clearly takeii 
with :r view to improving Chile's legal position-an 
attenipt to 
create a title, iiot actioii in pursuaiice of ail existing one. Thcyare 
iiot, therefore to be takcn into consideration (Minqz~iers .and 
Ecrehos Case, I.C.J. Reports, 1953, p. jg). Secoiidly, eveii if thi: 
United Kingdoin had iiot previously acquired a good title, it iiii- 
<loubtedly displayed and exercised its sovereignty in and in regard 
io the South Shetlands and Graham Land during the period July 21, 
1908-No\~einher 6, 1940. Therefore, quite independently of its 
earlier titles, the United Kingdom liad already in the periotl 1908- 
1940 establishetl as against Chile, ail unimpeachable titlc to the 
sovereignty of these territories. Accordingly, the Cliileaii Ikcrce 
of November 6, 1940, aiid :dl Chilc's subsequent :rets iii niicl iii 
regard to the South Shetlarids w r e  aiitl always have beeii illegal 
and invalid (Easter~z Greeftla~td Case (1933) Series A/B j3. page 64). 
Events siibsequeiit to Xovember 6, 1940, are thus priniarily relevant 
for the purpose of shojving that, in face of the Chiieaii pretensions, 
the United I<ingdom iiid not abandon, Ilut actively rnaintaiiied, 
its titles to the territories in question. This is conclusively 
demonstrated in l~aragraphs 26-29 above. The United Kingdom, 
by its coiitinucd display of State activity ; by protests or counter- 
measiires which were always pronipt, ;ilid evidence of the exercise 
of due vigilance ; by attempts to settle the-dispute througli diplo- 
matic iiegc~tiatioiis ; by activily seeking to bring the dispute to 
arbitratioii or judicial settlement (sec paragraph 38 below) : and 
5y submittiiig the prcsent Application to the Court, has energetically 
prosecuted its case, upheld its sovcreignty and maintained its 
rights and titles. 
.-. 
The Jurispmdence of International Tribunals Negatives the Chilean 
Claims and Supports the United Kingdom's Titles 
" 
34. The jurisprudence of international tribunals botli iiegativcs 
ilie Chilean claims aiid supports the legal titles of thc United King- 
dom, inore especially the awards :ind judgments in the following 
:\vdl{l<noiyii &ses :- 

7I 
APPI.ICATIOK INSTlTUTlNG I'KOCEEDINGS (V 55) 
The Island of Palmas (1928) 2 Reports of International Arbitral 
Awards, 831 ; 
Clipperton Islaii~l (1931) 2 Reports of International Arbitral 
Awards, 1105 ; 
Lcgal Status of Eastern Greenland (1933) Series A/B 53 ; 
81incluicrs aiid Ecrehos 1.C.J. Reports, 1953, p. 47. 
35. .l'licsï iiiotlern cases of higli iruthority, iiegative coniplet~?. 
any Chileaii claim basecl on nlleged historie groiinds of title deriving 
frorn succession to siipposetl titles acquired by Spain. Apart froni 
the fact that, oii the evideiice, iio original Spanish titles caii be 
established at alllg. the Islaltd oj Polmos Case (page 846) and the 
Clipperfo?~ Island Case (page I rog) clearly show that aiiy such 
early Spniiish titlcs coiild not prevail to-&y against long contiiiued 
British tlisplay and exercise of sovereigiity. Again, eveii if it were 
possible to apply the cloctriiie of geoeogcrphical coritigiity to islantls 
distant soinc 400 ~iiiles, or to a separate coiitiiieiit distant some 
500 miles, from Chileaii tcrritory, the Islniid oj Pnlpnas Case 
(pays S54-3jj. SGg aiid 870) iic~ativcs coinpletely any Chilean 
clatm based or1 so-called gcographical grouiids of title. and clearly 
lays clown that tlicy could iiot prevail :igainst nctual display and 
csercise of iovercignty. .4s to Chilc's plen (see paragraph 30 above) 
that she \\.;is 
ignorant of the British titles, it is enough to rec:rll 
the facts set out in paragrapli 24 (3) tibove \\,hich esiahlish Cliile's 
acquiescence in and recogiiitioii of these titlcs. 3loreover, theBritish 
title \vas ir qiiestioii of fact and la\\., in no \vay dcpciideiit on Chile's 
recognition of it. Iii aiiy eveiit, the Islnnd of Polmns Case (page 
S6S) and the Clippertoit Isl(rird Case (page 1110) einphaticrilly 
statc that official iiotificatioii is not reqnisitc under general inter- 
national la\\., while the Ensterir Greeitlniid Case (page 62) and the 
Miitqttiers niid Ecrehos Case (page 66) clearly show that any reserva- 
tioiis \\.hich might have beeii made hy Chile would not have altered 
the chnracter and effect of the British Lettcrs Patent, or of the 
other British legislati\,e and atlininistrative acts as maiiifestntions 
of liritisli sovcreigiit~l. 
36. At the saille tiiiie, the above-iiieiitioiied leadiiig cases show 
coiiclusively that the "jurirlical" and "adiiiiiiistrative" grounds 
referred to by the Chileaii Goveriiinent strongly siipport the claims 
of the United Kingdoin, and not those of Chile. Thris, the Islaitd 
O/ l->olnrus Case (page 870) :rnd the Clipperloir Islni~d Case (page 
" Thc territones conceriied werç barcly disçovered iii Spaiii's day. and then nor 
by Spain (sec pnrapr:iyhs6-T r nl>ove). Tliey wero never ]>art of nny Spanishdominioii. 

72 
A1'PI.ICATION. ISSTITUTING I>ROCEEUINGS (\' 55) 
1110) indicatc that. the British takings of possession describcd in 
paragraphs 6-11 of thc present !\pplicatioii created initial British 
titles superior to any of Chile's pretended historical or geographical 
titles. Thc island O/ Palfnas Case (pages 838-840 and 876). Eastern 
Greazland Case (pages 52, 54 and 63) and Minquiers a ~ t d  Ecrehos 
Case (at page 65) conclusively shoii~ that to-day, in case of dispute, 
the primary test of sovereignty is the actual display and exercise 
of the functions of a Stite in and iii regard to the disputed terri- 
tories diiririg the relevant periods. In the present case, it is eiident 
from the facts set out in the preseiit .4pplicatioii that it is the United 
Kingdoin, iiot Chile that has displayed and esercised the function 
of a State in rcgarcl t« the South Shetlands and Graham Land, 
and cspecially diiring the decisirc period of 32 years immediately 
precediiig the critical date, iiamely, No\'einber 6, 1940, as well as 
carliei-. 
37. 'Shc United Kingdom, in its pleadings, \vil1 refer mith greater 
particulanty to the iiumcroiis passages in the four ahorc-mentioried 
leadiiig cases and in other authorities ivhich support its titles to 
sovereigiit); over the Falkland Islands Deperidcncies. Although the 
present Application is necessarily preliminar); in character, the 
special circiimstaiiccs appear to jiistify drawing attention to the 
jurispriideiice of the four leading cases, merely as an indication of 
hon- solid are thc legal bases of the British titles, and hoir dei,oid 
of any foundatioii the Chilean preteiisions. 
Acceptance of the Court's Jurisdiction in the Case 
3% The United Kirigdoiii, having regard tu the lorig period during 
\\rl;ich British souereigtity has beeii effectively exercised in and iii 
regard to the Sonth Shetlaiids and Graham Land, would have beeri 
justified in taking strong measures to put an end to Chile's encroach- 
ments on thesc British territ«rics13. Firmly believing in the pacific 
settlcmeiit of disputes among nations by judicial procedures aiid on 
the hasis oi law, it has preferrcd, when negotiations proved fruitless, 
to seek to have its dispute with the Repiiblic of Chile regarding these 
territories submitted to the Iiiternatioiial Court or other judicial or 
arbitral triùi~nal. Shus, in Xotes of lleceniber 17, 194.7, the United 
I<iiigdoni Goveriiment iiivited Chile and Argentina to whom a 
separatc iii\ritation \vas sent, to challenge the British titles to sover- 
eigiity I>y iiivoking the jurisdiction of the International Court of 
Justice, \\.hich the United Iiingdom woiild then accept. Chile, in 
Xote of January 31, '1948, replied to the effect that, sincc sheregardeil 
- .... ~ 
-- 
la Forcible action had iii fact to be taken in onc case (nanieiy at lhception Island 
in February 1953) "ben a particularly flagrant attenipt was niade to erect a Chilean 
hut actually within the l?recincts of the exi-ing and occupied British baie on that 
island. 

73 
-4PPLICAl.ION ISSTITUTIKG PROCEEI>INGS (V jj) 
her own prctensions as irrefutable, it wonld not be logically justi- 
fiable for her to approach the Court". The United Kingdom, in a 
Note of Narch II, 1948, reaffirrned its willingness to collaborate with 
Chile aiid Argentina in subinittiiig the dispute to the Court. The 
United Iiiiigdom renewed its offer to go before the Court in Notes of 
April3, 1951, and January 16, 1953, "thout, however, obtaining a 
favoiirable response from the Republic of Chile. ils the continuance 
of the dispute concerning the sovereignty of the territories of the 
Falkland Islands Dependencies iiecessarily threatens to impair the 
existing friendly relations between the tmo countries, the United 
Kingdom addressed a further Note to Chile on December 21, 1954, 
inviting her, jointly with the United Kingdom, to refer the dispute 
to an independent ad hoc arbitral tribunal. On the same date, the 
United Kingdom addressed an identical Note to Argentina. Neither 
of thesc countries, however, has thought fit to accept the United 
Kingdom's proposal 'j. 
39.. The United Kingdom, in its Notes of December 21 last, stated 
that in the event of Chile (or equally Argentina) failing to accept its 
offer of arbitration, it reserved the right to takc such steps as might 
bc open to it to obtain an adjudication of its legal rights. One of the 
steps open to the United Kingdom is to bring the dispute before the 
Coi~rt b y a  unilateral Application under Article 40 (1) of the Statute 
and Article 32 (2) of the Rules and, as indicated in paragraph T 
:rbore, it is this procedure which the United Kingdoni has elected to 
nclopt. 
40. Tho United Kingdom Govemment, therefore, declarcs that it 
hereby subinits ti, the jurisdiction of the Court for the purposes of 
the case referred to the Court in the present Application-(for 
the 
precise scope of this submission, see footnote I to paragraph L above). 
The Chilean Government has iiot, so far as the United Kingdom 
Government is amare, yet filed any cleclaration accepting the Court's 
jurisdictio? either generally iinder Article 36 (2) of the Statute or 
specially in the present case. The Chilean Government, which has. 
frequently expressed its adherence to the principle of judicial settle- 
ment of international disputes, is, however, legally qualified to. 
'. Ili<: . L ~ ~ ~ , ~ L I I ~ ~ I $ ;  
~ ~ ~ . I C J I I U I I  
r~g.ir111114 
.\r':cntlnii 
p1rdgr.1111. ,<,, 
~ I I I \ P S  rlzal 
tlCt: Iatt~r cuiinitry. to whtch a iiiiiil;ar i h r  n;ic m.ide. touk tlir s ~ t i i i .  Iiitr Yet 6011. 
claiti.; (e:<<.l. 
rc:lntiiig <O tlir iuiirti Slieilnn<ls ,nrl i:r:ih.irn I . ; ~ i i ~ l i  
r.<tiii<it h a i e  Ihe,.!i 
good : and the inference is that neither \vus 
' 5  The prescnt Application is of course. formally, quitc separate froiii the corre- 
spanding Application respecting Argentins ; but the significancc of these rival 
claims ta the same area will not be overloolced. It is a clear case of two rival and 
incompatible attcmpts to oust and usiirp the legitimate sovercignty of the United. 
Kingdom. 

; i i l > i i i i r  
1 8 .  rlic jiiri~~lii.iiaiii ~ . f  
rlic i:~ 
i i i i  11. rliis c ~ t , ~ .  ( ~ c ~ i i ~ t : ~ ~ i i ~ i i ~ I
UDOII ii~itiric:itic~ii 
,>f I lie uie>t;iii .Ai)i)lic;i~ivi~ 
Lu th(! I<f.i>tiblic of Cliilc 
h i  the Kegistrar in accohance with the Rules of ~ou;t, the Chileao 
Goveriiiiieiit, urider tlic settled jurispnidence of the Court, can take 
the necessary steps to that ciid, and thereby cause the Court's juns- 
diction in tlie case to be c~iiistituted in respect of Parties. 
41. The Uiiited Kiiigdoiii Goveriiiiieiit fouiids the jurisdictioii of 
the Court on the foregoing considerations and on Article 36 (1) of 
the Court's Statute ; and asks that a copy of the preseiit hpplicatioii 
be transiiiitted to the Government of Chile in accordarice with 
.4rticle 33 of the Knles of the Court aiid to al1 Jfembers of the United 
Natioris and othei- States entitled to appear I>efore the Court, uiidei- 
Article 34 of the said liiiles. 
42. The attitudc of tlie Cliileari Governmeiit in this case has corn'- 
pelled the Uiiitetl Kiiigdom to take the initiative iii placiiig the 
matter before the Court, and therefore in effect to appear as appli- 
cant. The Unitecl Kiiigdom Go\rernnient nevertheless wishes to rnake 
the fullest reservatioiis on tlie question of the oiius of proof of title: 
It considers that the maiiifest prioritg in tinie of the Britisli posses' 
sion of the territories datiiig back to periods varying betweeii I I O  
and 180 years ago, and the complete absence during virtuaUy the 
whole of those penods, until a quite receiit date, of aiiy activities of 
a sovereigii character other thaii British, in the territories, is indicT 
ative of a self-eviduit British title, whicli it is for any country 
challeriging that title to rehiit. 
The Contentions and Claims of the United Kingdoin Government 
in the Case 
43. Tlie Goi,eriiinciit of the Uiiited Kiiigdoni, iii si~l>mittirig 
this 
application to the Court, accoi-dingly contends :- 
(1) that by .reasoii of historie Rritisli discoveries of certain terri- 
tories in thc Antarctic and siib-Aiitnrctic ; by reasoii of the 
long-continiied and peaceful display of British sovereignty 
froni the date of those discoveries onwards in, and in regard 
ta, the territories concemed ; by reason of the incorporation 
of these territories in the dominions of the British 'rom ; 
hy virtiie of their forma1 constitiition in the Koyal Letters 
Patent of 1908 and 1917 as the British Possession called the 
Falkland Islands Dependencies : the United I<iiigdom pos- 
sesses, and at al1 material dates has possessed, the sover- 
eigiity over the territories of the Falkland Islands Depeiid- 

eiicies, aiid iri particular the South Shetlands aiid Grahaiil 
Land ; 
(2) that the legal titles of the United Kingdom to the Falkland 
Islands Dependencies, and in particular to the South Sliet- 
lands and Graham Land, are, and at al1 material dates have 
been. supenor to the claims of any other State, and in par- 
ticular to those of the Reoul>lic of Chile : 
~, 
(31 thai iri cniisi.(liiencç, [II<- ~>reterisiuii.s 
of tlic Keliiit~lic 
t i f  Ctiilc 
tu tht: Soiirli Slictli~nds iiiid i;rati:,iii I.aiid :iiiil 1ii.i ciicroacli. 
ineiits and ixetended acts of soverei~rit\~ 
in those territories 
are, uiider iiiteriiational lati,, il~egal'aiid iiivalid 
M. The Go\,eriime~it of the United Kiiigdoiii, therefore, aslis the 
Court tn declare- 
(1) that the United Kiiigdoiii, as agaiiist the Kepublic of Chile. 
possesses, aiid at al1 material dates has possessed, valid and 
subsisting legal titles to the sovereignty of the South Shet- 
laiids and Graham Land ; 
(2) that the preteiisions of the IZepublic of Chile to the South 
Shetlands and Graham Land aiid her encroachments and 
\refciided acts ~f io\.ereigiit\: iii ur ri:l;iti\e to tliose terri- 
toriL:s :ire. ii~ider internatinii;il l;~\\., ilicgal ;iii(I iii\,ali<l ; 
(3) tliat the Kepublic of Cliile is I~ound to respect the Uiiited 
Kingdom's sovereignty over the South Shetlands aiid Gra- 
ham Land, to cease her preteiisions to exercise sovereignty 
in, or relative to those territories and, if called on by the 
United Kingdom, to withdraw from them al1 or any Chilean 
personnel and equipment. 
1 have the Iionour to be, 
Sir, 
Your obedierit Sen,aiit, 
(Signed) G. G .  F~TZMAURICE, 
Agent for the Govemnient 
of the Uiiited Kingdoni. 

ANNEXES 
(1) Letters Patent of July zr, 1908. (British and Foreign Staie Papers, 
1907-08, Vol. 101.) 
(2) Letiers Patent of March 28, 19x7. (IIrilish nnd Foreign Stirte I'apsrs, 
1917.18, \',II. I I I , )  
(3) Presidential Decree of the Republic of Chile of November 6, 1940. 
Translation froni La A~ztdrtida ChiJe~zn by Oscar I'inoclict de la 
Harra (Stntiago, 1g44), pp. 23-24, 
Santiago, November 6, 1940. 
\VHEREAS : 
It is the (Iiit?; of tlic State to îix, witli exactitiide, its territorial 
limits ; 
Ui> to tlic uresent the Chihai~ territorial Liniits in tlrnt part wliich 
extcnds townids tlie polar region kno\vii as the America; Antarctic 
have not beeii defined ; 
The Iliiiistry for Foreign Affairs piblicly cleclared iri ry6 t!ia' 
the 
delimitatioii of the territory 1-efcrrcd to w;is the siil~jjecct o preliminary 
invcstigatioiis whicli hcid not yet beeii completed ; 
The actiial state of these investigations now enables ;I decisinri to 
he reachcd iii tliis reslxct : 
The speckil comniissiori appoiiited by the hlinistry ior I;oreigii ALfairh' 
decree No. 1541 of the 7th Scptember, 1939, havc i:stablished the 
boiiiidaries of the Chilean Antarctic territory in accordance with the 
data supplicd by geographical, historical, jiiridical and dil>lomatic 
precedents which hnvr: heen consiilted aiirl arithenticated u11 ti> the 
present tiine : 
1 decree : 
Ail lands, islniids. islets, reefs, glaciers (pack-icc), &c., already kiiuwii 
or to be discovered, .and their les >cctive territorial waters, in the scctor 
d 
betweeii loiigitudes 53" and 90 West of Greenwich. constitiite the 
Chilean Antarctic or Cliileaii Antarctic territory. 
Take ilote, communic:rte, piiblisb and insert in the Uiilletin of Lrws 
aiirl Decrees of the Gn\~emment.-Acui~l~~~ 
CERDA.-MARCIAI. 
MORA M. 
