6LNuRW9t4JA [6LNu-53] (8L) 33:33 something very important  left out:  In December 1959, US President Dwight Eisenhower recognized that the Panamanian flag should be hoisted together with the US flag, and negotiations were  initiated, which were consummated in the Chiari-Kennedy Agreement of 1962.
6LNuRW9t4JA [6LNu-121] (2L) Mr. Dill reports living in Gorgona while building the Canal.  Strange as Gorgona is about 60 miles into the interior.  He may have been referring to Gamboa, a town located in the middle of Gatun Lake and on the rail line crossing the isthmus .  Later on harboring equipment such as the Atlas, A huge Crain stationed there to assist in accidents jamming passage along with storage of extra parts, Lock
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-5] (1800L) From the first Senate resolution in 1835 favouring Nicaragua until the dramatic change of location for the canal in the Spooner Act, the American public and government had consistently and overwhelmingly supported a canal through Nicaragua. That the canal was built in Panama is primarily attributable not to the intrinsic merits of the Panama route but to the ingenuity and zeal of two remarkable me
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-6] (1800L) This video was like an early Easter Egg, as a Panamanian I never expected him to talk about this topic, it must be said that he skips some important facts, but to be a summary it is acceptable; On the other hand, I am glad to see the history and the beautiful flag of my country, finally on this channel. By the way, for those who think that everything was caused by US interference in the country, t
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-24] (131L) If someone saw what it cost the U.S. to maintain and protect the canal they would be astonished.  The Canal Zone was a country in itself.  It had a police force, courts, stores, theatres, recreational facilities, schools.  At a lecture, the comptroller for the Panama Canal told us transit rates were too low and this was done to provide financial support for companies in Latin American countries.  
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-39] (48L) Also the most important warships (carriers) in the US Navy could no longer fit in the canal. So militarily, the canal lost a lot of value
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-59] (21L) I love how the narrator didn't mention the campaing for the Panama Canal, the voting on the UN or the diplomatic meetings about it and the congress decision on favor of it. Erroneously portraying it as just a Jimmy Carter decision.
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-87] (9L) An important point in 1977 (overlooked in the video) should be remembered in any new discussion.  The infrastructure was already considered vulnerable to modern sabotage, so cooperation with the Panamanians was/is considered necessary to successful operation.  IIRC, the phrase at the time was something like "it only takes one revolutionary with a bomb...."
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-98] (8L) Clicking on this in 2022: ooh sure, I'll watch that sounds interesting.  vs. in 2025 : huh, i should probably watch that, seems important to my understanding of current geopolitics...
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-123] (5L) An important addition to your point about wanting to enhance the US’s standing amongst Latin Americans is that Carter wanted to do so in order to promote his human rights programme in the region, which would act as a stepping stone towards promoting human rights in the wider world and thereby shake off the legacies of Vietnam and to a lesser extent Chile. Part of this platform also included econom
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-148] (3L) I'm a little curious if supporters of the recent talk about the Panama Canal actually realize that the operational cost of the Panama Canal and limitations would be huge financial liability for the United States.  In today's MEGA capacity vessels, the size of tankers and large ship might be an issue.  For example what are the largest tankers and cargo ships these days would they fit easily into th
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-151] (3L) It is important to understand, Panama was a province of Colombia, US help to get that land ...
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-168] (2L) And now this is a bit more relevant video. Funny how history is important but ignored by many.
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-193] (0L) How on earth did you manage to tell this story without the most important person involved "Phillipe Bunau-Varilla" without him the canal would not exist.
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-194] (0L) Very well, but this computer forgot to mention General Torrijos, a very important part of this puzzle
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-8] (349L) I'm Panamanian🇵🇦, and I didn't expect this channel to drop a video about such an important part of our history. This video perfectly encapsuled everything our History teachers have been teaching us about the Canal's history. Although, in a more engaging way.😅
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-15] (66L) Panama: Thanks for supporting our independence from Colombia, USA. We now have self-determination, right?  USA: Yeah... about that
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-17] (61L) Many Panamanians actually voted against the pacts, since 22 years was a long time to wait for full control of the canal, and the rare opportunity to vote against the Government for its shortcomings on all sorts of issues.
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-22] (27L) I loved this video! I'm Panamanian and everything was well-covered except one thing: The US didn't go to Panamanians directly. The leaders of the Panamanian separatist movement were in New York looking for the government's support with the separation movement. However, instead of striking a deal with them, the U.S. signed a treaty with one of the main investors of the French Canal project, Phillip
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-23] (27L) I like how they called Panama independence a coup, just because it was supported by the USA
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-77] (2L) What in the cinnamon toast is encouragement and military support meant for...
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-109] (1L) Unfun fact: With so many workers dying during the construction of the canal, special train cars had to be commissioned to transport the dead bodies from the site and to the burial sites
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-190] (0L) Dude you didn't even mention Phillipe Phillipe was the most important part of that canal coming to fruition
zCx7_VzR1Ho [zCx7-38] (0L) the most horrible is that china take over the port
HY8QdxWRCwU [HY8Q-40] (0L) How would a Thailand KRA canal compare? Can water supplies support the new super lock system?
HY8QdxWRCwU [HY8Q-60] (0L) We wrote a historical novel set in the period BEFORE the canal. Teddy Roosevelt decreed 'not one spade of dirt could be dug before the canal was dug.  People took the twelve thousand trip rather than take a train trip across the ithmus. As you reported the French who dug the Suez canal thought Panama (Half as long) would be simple. Panama was the most dangerous place on earth. Yellow fever and Mal
HY8QdxWRCwU [HY8Q-79] (0L) I think that the world should apply severe sanctions on the US for supporting a civil war that resulted in the succession of Panama from Venezuala, similar to how many countries that are under US control are currently santioning Russia because of Crimea.  What is good for the goose is good for the gander.
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-1] (1300L) Step 1: Get Blackrock to buy the ports Step 2: There are no more steps, his billionaire buddies profit
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-5] (337L) Let me clarify, Panama canal is not operated by chinese, all workers are from Panama and can only be from Panama by law, all fees are the same to everyone, yes the two ports are not in the canal but close to it and hutchinson won the lease, hutchinson ports oparate in mayor ports around the world like england, australia, europe biggest ports even in u.s. soil etc.. Trump is just doing art of the d
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-17] (47L) It's amusing how Blackrock was central to so many MAGA conspiracies and yet they're now celebrating this arrangement.
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-21] (41L) To all Panamanians, Canadians, Mexicans, and Europeans, just know there are tens of are millions of Americans who do not agree with, nor do we support, the current occupants of the White House, and we never will. We Americans stand firmly with you, with Canada, with Mexico, with Denmark, and especially with Ukraine. Love and blessings to you all. God save American Democracy, and the United States 
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-29] (11L) You mean your friends from Black Rock are reclaiming it.. they have already ..!!
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-36] (7L) It is a pity that a report on the Panama Canal, which for the past 25 years has been operated exclusively by Panamanians, does not include any Panamanian experts on the canal. They might have corrected an important detail in the report: the five ports adjacent to the Canal still belong to Panama, what Black Rock bought was the concession to operate two of them for the next 24-25 years (which, by t
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-45] (4L) Companies in Hong Kong are not obliged to share information with the ccp or the HK government
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-64] (2L) I’m from Panama and a capitalist, I support whoever invests more money to operate. China didn’t control the canal the same way I hope the USA won’t pressure to control it.   Now, I find it very hypocritical to say that Panama violated the neutrality agreement but  when a USA company buys the concession to operate the ports then it is all good. Just like that Trump’s lies are exposed….
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-68] (1L) So Chinese company running the port is violation of the treaty but American company running is neutral?
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-69] (1L) The prelude to World War 3😍 Democratic Congo, Ukraine, "US, give me minerals, but give me military support"
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-70] (1L) CK Hutchison sounds benign and western enough 😂how did Trump know?
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-77] (1L) the logic that because the us build the canal it can just reclaim it is Ludacris. I mean the French and British could take back the Suez canal too if that was the argument. The canal belongs to Panama. It neutrality is guaranteed so that ships from whatever country can safely go trough it. The fact that a Chinese company controls both ports is not a violation of the treaty because ships can still 
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-103] (0L) 1:50 CKH, the Hong Kong operator is a publicly traded company on the Hang Seng Index, (Hong Kong stock market). It's largest shareholder is the Li Kashing family, whose two sons run the group. They are Canadian citizens.
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-104] (0L) BlackRock is a bit swampy, it matches the geography.
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-112] (0L) So let me get this straight: Trump says Panama is violating its neutrality agreements by letting Chinese firms invest large amounts in two ports on either side of the canal. So the proposed solution would be to give the ports to European or American firms instead, thus making it unequivocally neutral. Makes a ton of sense.
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-127] (0L) Getting control of the ports was the ultimate goal.. the rest of the words were to get to that point.. well done president.. we got REAL control back... nice
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-142] (0L) BlackRock could still sell the right to run these 2 ports to anybody for profit. And, it is not disclosed that when such right will expire.
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-151] (0L) Already took control through Black Rock. Shows how much these so-called experts are clueless.
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-160] (0L) as someone that worked at the canal... US n most European ships pay higher fees... this report has to be double checked
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-167] (0L) Blackrock ...
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-168] (0L) Black rock is chinese investors by the way
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-169] (0L) I know that the government is big hit SURELY there are more important things for him to be focused on
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-179] (0L) They're trying to steal land ceded in a treaty, seems like they pulled this with the Indians too, treaty for thee not for me. And BlackRock controls those ports, not the Chinese, and guess what did the Chinese stop us from going through? Nope. Greed greed greed
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-181] (0L) That's all very nice. black rock paid 22 billion. What's in it for wall street?
BrH66Phjjts [BrH6-187] (0L) The WSJ report indicates that CK Hutchison’s control over the ports at both ends of the Panama Canal has ended due to BlackRock’s recent acquisition. This is a notable shift in U.S. efforts to counter Chinese influence in the region. However, this does not mean China has lost all its leverage over Panama or Latin America as a whole.  Even though BlackRock now controls the Canal’s ports, China has 
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-1] (1L) BLACKROCK IS SATAN
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-2] (1L) They are not buying the Panama Canal, they are paying for the right to run the Balboa port Pacific side and the Cristobal Port, Atlantic side. Has nothing to do with the Miraflores locks or the rest of the Canal.
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-3] (0L) TRUMP gloating killed the Black Rock deal 😜😜
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-4] (0L) Interesting that I have been onto Black Rock for about 7 years now, & I started watching PBD in December or January; but "the algorhythm" never suggested this video to me. I had to search it.
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-7] (0L) one day you will hear “the black rock owns the blue marble” 🤓
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-8] (0L) Neither Blackrock or the communists party of China are choices for free and honest trade through the Panama Canal. Blackrock represents the Rothschild/Rockefeller establishment not that of the American people we have been sold out.
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-13] (0L) Blackrock secured the ports deal for an Italian - Gianluigi Aponte, head of a shipping family. Trump will take credit, why not?
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-18] (0L) They didn't buy the ports in Panama.  Panama owns the ports, they bought the concession to manage the ports for the remainder of the term.  Another example of someone pontificating on a subject they know nothing about.  So many people out there trying to monetize their opinion even if they don't know the subject matter.
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-19] (0L) I thought blackrock was a dirty company? This is playing with fire, trump got ballsy with this one and CK needs to run to America before Xi gets ahold of him and his family
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-21] (0L) ❤😊WATCHING FROM NZ AUCKLAND OTARA THANKS MR FOR THE VIDEO REPORTER ❤YOU ARE THE BEST PERSON N  ROGANPOTCAST❤😊AMEN GOOD JOB MR
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-24] (0L) I believe that The U.S. should be owning those ports. Not a private company. We the U.S. built the Panama Canal. It should have never been sold off in the first place.
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-25] (0L) Iranian you talk to much the Nigerian billionaire is Black Rock. These deal is going to go South. You need a Iran deal lets see if Trump makes you  team leader.
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-27] (0L) This 1:27 atempt to buy these "gate" areas on atlantic & pacific "gate" l do not think Hutchison Company is going to happen! Hutchison is a chinese company!
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-32] (0L) Why are you miss leading. Panamá Canal Is not for sale. People who talk like this are very wrong and ignorant. Ports and the canal are 2 different things and a whole complete different operations.
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-33] (0L) I hate Blackrock and Blackstone, Trump should make this a 50/50 deal. We put up 25% and promise military security, we become partners with first right of refusal if Blackrock decides to sell their interest. Hey Trump I'm available for a cabinet appointment! Lol
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-36] (0L) So Chinese can't buy Blackrock shares? 😊
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-37] (0L) 2 of the guys that tried to murder trump we’re on black rock commercials why would anyone trust black rock
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-40] (0L) I will be either the next ceo of blackrock. Or I’ll buy the Panama Canal.
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-48] (0L) much  better  that   blackrock own that  port  than  the  communist   china  xiejinping!!  the  world  will  be  chaotic  if  communist   china  own  it !!! communist   regimed  days  are numbered!!!xie  jinping  i  in a  panic  mode !!! the   rise   of  new  independent   chin a  will  rise
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-49] (0L) They don't "buy" the ports nor do they "buy" the Panama Canal. They buy a company that has a limited-years contract to serve the logistics in 2 ports in Panama.
k9X0JruXOWY [k9X0-50] (0L) Black Rock violates the anti monopoly laws/ anti trust laws. They are a threat to the USA and the world
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-2] (2L) Chinese State has its eye on Panama Canal through S.America BRI, while its State company has eye on the ports at both sides of the ocean.:body-green-covering-eyes:
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-3] (1L) How much money has china pumped into the canal. Follow the paper trail. They pumped money into El Salvador for an airport I have heard. Maybe chinese want to take vacations there. It is like the Indian strategy when they asked the Indian, which way did they go? The Indian said 'That way.' Which was a different if not the opposite direction.
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-21] (0L) 22 billion $ actually  Chinese company still owns 20% stake and the other port .  Not to mention Blackrock has chinese owners as well
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-25] (0L) Nope . China just made a master move .  China allows Blackrock to buy the ports . Chinese also have stake in Blackrock.  So usa company that has chinese investors gets 80% ownership of panama port   Oops  22 billion $ actually  Chinese company still owns 20% stake and the other port .  Not to mention Blackrock has chinese owners as well
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-32] (0L) The next thing Trump will claim is the Azores,  "its in the midle of the beautifull atlantic , we have a beautifull air base in one of the islands... we are going make the portuguese an offer they cant resuse.. 😂😊
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-33] (0L) Li Ka-shing's Hong Kong shipping giant, Hutchison Ports, is definitely not East India Company.  It doesn’t do imperialism and gun-boat diplomacy.  Stop the anti-China paranoia.
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-42] (0L) Nope . China just made a master move .  China allows Blackrock to buy the ports . Chinese also have stake in Blackrock.  So usa company that has chinese investors gets 80% ownership of panama port   Oops  22 billion $ actually  Chinese company still owns 20% stake and the other port .  Not to mention Blackrock has chinese owners as well
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-46] (0L) I can't believe maga news outlets are still now reporting trumps lies that China controlls Panama
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-47] (0L) The Canal is one thing, Ports are another things. He keeps sayins Chineses Control the Canal. No chineses work at the Canal. The company at the port was operate by a Hong Kong company, when England adminstrated Hong Kong, the England finished their time administrating Hong Kong so Hong Kong is diferent than China still, it back to China administration. Those ports in Panama are working since US we
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-48] (0L) Nope . China just made a master move .  China allows Blackrock to buy the ports . Chinese also have stake in Blackrock.  So usa company that has chinese investors gets 80% ownership of panama port   Oops  22 billion $ actually  Chinese company still owns 20% stake and the other port .  Not to mention Blackrock has chinese owners as well
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-49] (0L) When it comes to operating PORTS - China is best at it. Greece is now the entreport to EU. So why dont UD buily infrastructure rather than Military Bases?
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-56] (0L) China controls 2 ports one on each side of the canal.  While I don’t like Trump, he isn’t wrong about China’s influence over the canal.
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-57] (0L) So DW news just showed their hand. I will Unsubscribed and now click the 3 dots when I see one of their videos to click don’t recommend. Sorry DW I used to listen to your stuff. Bye. Hope you’re privately funded, you have good reporting in many cases but lost me on this one.  Peace.
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-78] (0L) China has a string of pearls plan the canal is part of this plan...control of ports world wide ..look it up
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-81] (0L) Dennis Hogan had a special relationship with Hutchison of Hong Kong controlled by CCP and the DW reporter collaborated well in defending the secret agendas of the Chinese military involvement in times of military confrontation with the US Navy in the Pacific, where the CCP will coke off this waterway.
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-82] (0L) What happen with the influence of China into the US ports , check out COSCO ( CHINA OCEAN SHIPPING COMPANY) the have in the long way of US waters ( i.e. Seattle, California, NY , New Yersey..etc) CHINA IN CONTROLING ALL US PORTS
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-95] (0L) The HK base public trade company Hutchinson  administrated   the ports of both side Panama Canal , the   Contract started from 1997  and renewed for another 25 yr ( from 2021 ). Panama only switch diplomatic relation from Taiwan to mainland China  in 2017 . Hutchinson crop is the HK base  and  Cayman Islands–registered multinational conglomerate corporation  , control by Li Ka-shing's  family. How
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-99] (0L) I am sorry but I believe, based on my knowledge of history, which is vast and more so in the case of Panama, Mr. Hogan is either lying, yes LYING, or does not know the history of Panama. The United States of America has helped Panama to be a stable country and actually supported its economy. Of course, The United States of America did not want to gebe the cananl to the Panamanian Government becaus
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-8] (29L) A Hong Kong company bought and was controlling the Panama freaking canal, literally on the other side of the world. Think about that for a moment. Who's been sleeping?
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-12] (15L) This will happen all over the world over the next few years.  Britain will want control of their water and power.  Nations all over the world will look at their national infrastructure and take it back from foreign investors.  Nations can’t rent their own life support and critical infrastructure to other countries, companies or interests.
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-18] (6L) Laura Loomer was the first to Panama China reporting.
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-32] (2L) Just Nationalize these ports. F China.
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-34] (2L) Another important win for Trump.Good.
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-38] (1L) So what is happening in panama port now..after 2 months ?
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-42] (1L) You completely misconstrued this. The port leases have been controversial for years in Panama, not because it is a Chinese company, but because the contract was improperly renewed and the government felt it was being ripped off. Last spring the government sued, and the Supreme Court ruled in their favor.  Also it wasn't just Carter, the movement to return the sovereingnty of the canal goes back to
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-46] (1L) I was from Hong Kong so I could shine a light what it is going on. Hutchinson had the right to operate the port, not own the port. Hutchinson also have many other ports around the world. During Ukrainian war, CCP pressured Lee Ka Shing to not let the US  military to unload materials. Lee Ka Shing is not part of CCP but many of his business are still in Hong Kong. He tried to sell the right of oper
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-56] (1L) Fuck black rock tired of WEF mfers buying everything
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-70] (0L) Panama announce public bidding are a joke it blatant robbery of taking the control of port and passing it Maersk and MSC control. Both company have been summon into China ministry to have a talk. So guess which one gonna take the mess.
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-101] (0L) Oly shit 600 bucks for "value"tainment shoe's. I can get two thorogood's for that price that's made in USA supporting the USA economy and US workers. Plus I think American leather is better and more durable then Italian leather.   PBD how are you saying America this and America that and America first then turn around and try to sell American's Italian leather shoe's to American's for an obnoxious 
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-104] (0L) Pat watching from Panama City 🇵🇦  CK Hutchington IS the Chinese government, there are not private enterprises in China.  China will let it happen because otherwise they’re gonna have to answer to Trump, that’s out guy too. We have the only Trump Tower in Latin America.  That’s why we need to make Trump a King.  Those progressive idiots deserve to dissolve as a party, ludicrous their stance on abor
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-2] (226L) Those Panamanian politicians who sold these ports in the first place should be in jail.
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-15] (28L) Peru's Port is also controlled by the Chinese Communist Party and the Peruvian people has had enough and they are also fighting back against the Communist take over!  🙏🙏🙏🙏👍👍👍👍
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-16] (26L) Just how they took back Hong Kong 😂
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-50] (3L) The port falls under the national security of Panama.  Panama is protecting their national security.
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-70] (1L) If they let Chinese take back the port. The US will have to reclaim the canal.
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-74] (1L) Mainstream news said nothing about communism taking over Hong Kong
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-75] (1L) This is why China took over Hong Kong, and this is why Panama did this.
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-84] (1L) Q : will not touch about the port per se ....BUT does those cranes, port boats, systems are invested by ponama doolar itself ...?? If not ponama then surely  Hutchinson can dismantle @ destr0y all those things before @ after take over of d port.....right...??? It's ponama choices to let all the "projection future destroy" of equipment & systems will impact or not directly on d port surroundings it
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-93] (1L) Ohh no the communists are mad they won’t be able to control the port anymore 🤣🤣🤣 am I supposed to be sad about this
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-106] (0L) Our smart Australian government in 2015 gave China a 100yr  lease on our port of Darwin and now they want it back from China
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-110] (0L) NO ONE is suppose to run the ports but Panama! Panama knows America isn't messing around
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-140] (0L) Why can’t Panamanians run the ports themselves, I don’t understand. They are running the canal????
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-145] (0L) First of all, why is a foreign company running your port. So now China is pissed cause they will  not be able to sneak in their fraudulent containers. Good job Panama, don't let China bully you.
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-149] (0L) Yeah China would do the same if the USA was buying and taking over ports and canals around China.
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-160] (0L) THANK YOU PRESIDENT TRUMP. For securing the Panama Canal as a strategic asset  And getting China out of the port
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-163] (0L) China sould sell the ports and move out of the Western Hemisphere NOW.
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-165] (0L) America and Trump told the Panama government to take the port back and they did now and stolen the chines money and equipments in the port.
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-172] (0L) Thanks Donald Trump. First, they claimed that China was not at all in control of the port, and that all of it was private investment. Then why the CCP is so upset.🤣🤣
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-173] (0L) USA, you will always have my support, especially against the commies 😊
NNJDeETKP78 [NNJD-197] (0L) The best part is, what can China even do to retaliate? Threaten to cut the Panama economy by instead landing in US and trucking goods across the US (indirectly supporting the economy of their enemy) or go ALL the way around to the tip of South America?
2pprDyBI-CQ [2ppr-9] (1L) Cargo ships operated by companies such as CK Hutchison, like any commercial vessels entering U.S. ports, may be subject to inspection by U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP). These inspections are conducted under U.S. customs, trade, and national-security laws and are intended to detect illegal drugs, chemical weapons precursors, prohibited hazardous materials, smuggled goods, and other contra
2pprDyBI-CQ [2ppr-33] (0L) CK Hutchison is a HONG KONG company, NOT a Chinese company, run by HK billionaire Li Ka Shing. CKS was independently run when the Panama Canal contract was won in 97/98. Since the dark cloud of the CCP rose over HK starting mid 2020, there is serious doubt as to whether CKS remains independent or is under the influence of the CCP, with the latter being highly likely. 😢
2pprDyBI-CQ [2ppr-45] (0L) CPC are doing great, Venezuela & Panama are insignificant to their enormous economy. usa trade is a mere 3% of China gdp. barely an inconvenience. communist systems are doing great for their citizens, while the western democracies providing more homeless opportunities!
stSB968YyW4 [stSB-3] (1L) C’mon guys, China paid Panama for the port concessions, Panama took the money, China invested more money into the port infrastructures over decades, everything was done legally, and then suddenly decades later, Panama now declares the deal illegal and takes away the port concessions from China. This is pure shameless robbery and a scam, and total disregard for international contracts and responsib
stSB968YyW4 [stSB-10] (0L) It's so weird that all these small countries have no clue that China being a gentle giant wouldn't just take their robbery lying down, as the guest framed it. From Nexperia in Netherland to CK Hutchison in Panama, do they really think they could just grab Chinese assets and that'd be the end of it?
stSB968YyW4 [stSB-19] (0L) Yes; Mulino does have an ace up his sleeve, whether you two know about it or not. Why must you assume he is naive, rather than that he knows he is at an advantage? Also: the fight is between two "Elephants" of disproportionate sizes, and Panama, like other countries/nations in this hemisphere, is a leg, organ or synapse of the Larger Elephant (and we know which one that is, don't we?). Panama has 
stSB968YyW4 [stSB-26] (0L) Few know the history of Panama's ports. They were administered, along with the canal, by the United States government until 1999, when they left the country with the end of the Torrijos-Carter Treaty. However, the ports were returned in a deplorable state. The Panamanian government initially offered concessions to the Americans, who declined and offered the lowest price. Then the Chinese and Taiwa
stSB968YyW4 [stSB-27] (0L) As Panamanian I can su this ports didint pay taxes for many years. Supreme Court was right.
stSB968YyW4 [stSB-30] (0L) If the Chinese would have acted on Panama Ports in accordance to good manners none of this problems would have happen. The Chinese government must act with their companies in order to imposed abiding the rules.
stSB968YyW4 [stSB-33] (0L) Independenty from US (which I am no fan of) presures that might very well be the cause for this Panamanian Supreme Court ruleing, Hutchinson's PPC was not a good actor in Panama. It is false to say that they administrated the ports without major incidents. PPC did not payed Panama what they owed. They found a way to not even pay taxes to Panama. Not only they did not let Panama profit their fair s
stSB968YyW4 [stSB-38] (0L) If Panama wants the canal back, it must buy over CK Hutchinsons' stake in the ports at a price determined by Hutchinson.  This practice is based on international commercial law.
stSB968YyW4 [stSB-42] (0L) Since the point of view of someone living in Panama 🇵🇦. Perception of the people here, is that there were envelopes under the table, in the last negotiations with the government and the jc Hutchinson Chinese company (Initially was from Hong Kong under the British rule). The company knew it was negotiating under a very uncertain and unlawful terms. They knew what they were doing just because they h
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-8] (2L) Report is pretty bias
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-11] (2L) The way he asked quesion is bias. He said, I quoted, "CK Hutichison has rejected the court's ruling...". While he didn't mention the so called court ruling is an one sided ruling by the Panama government, in which they denied the signed contract suddenly using "national security" as the reason under the pressure of the USA.
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-16] (1L) Haha.. Panama confiscating a investment by Hong Kong China. you think that China is bowdown by US bullying
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-24] (1L) right , after 7 years of ordinary operation, and right after U.S illegal kidnapping the president of Venezuela, the independent Panama found the Chinese Company illegal, completely stolen the shipping ports, Great business. Maybe China can come out announce BMW in China belong to the government next days.
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-29] (1L) So ridiculous! Chinese companies operated the port, not Panama Canal. How can a Chinese company close the canal?
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-30] (1L) @JFire175 you are so ridiculous. That company is a private one owned by a Hongkong billionaire. Besides, US government want to control Panama Canal, not China government.
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-37] (0L) ​ @Chicago48  chinese company has only contract to operate two ports near the canal.
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-48] (0L) If panama wants the ports, pay the price for the breach of contracts
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-52] (0L) The US and other regional countries? Who are the regional countries you are referring to?  Don't you know that the Panama government has already illegally seized and  taken over the two ports own by Hutchinson Hong Kong ?  Chinese container ships are now by-passing the Panama Canal and because of the illegal seizure  of the two Chinese ports,  Chinese investments have  mostly left the country. So 
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-56] (0L) Sure, take back the ports, but pay a fair compensation for expropriating the legal operator.
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-58] (0L) The contracts were not won by the US,(if they even bid)  despite the Chinese running the ports, Panama is independant and ensures shop traffic is mot on a preferential basis so no threat to anyone. The US is just using this as another way to make the north pole to South America American.
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-72] (0L) China wants the green light from Trump to invade Taiwan. He is gonna sacrifice Taiwan. In exhange, China agreed to stay relatively quiet on Venezuela, Cuba, Greenland, Iran, and Panama ports. Trump hasnt delivered Taiwan green light, so China is sabre rattling.
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-76] (0L) This lady is still avoiding the question of whether the USA is trying to take over the Panama canal, lol  China has bigger port in Peru. But the USA is trying to steal the Port of Darwin as well
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-77] (0L) The Bottom Line is while the U.S. and Panama may win the legal battle over who operates the ports at the Canal's mouth, they may "win the battle but lose the war" if the world's largest manufacturer China decides the waterway of Panama Canal is no longer worth the political hassle.  In the end, Panamanians lose the most, and the US political scene is just a soap opera that Americans will soon put 
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-87] (0L) ​ @JeffreyFay what people don't know is that CK Hutchinson is a HK private company. It has nothing to do with CCP or China. The CK Hutchinson boss Mr Li even had some dispute incidents with the CCP. Some CCP presses accused him of moving money away from China.
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-88] (0L) I'm saying as an American that any country that stands against this evil communist country China that is the great evil of our time. Has the full support of America, has the full backing of our military.   FAFO 🧡🧡🙏   Fear no one but God. Bless y'all hearts 🧡 🍊
DZYr2vHTudI [DZYr-100] (0L) 1:54 That’s not 100% correct. The contracts with CK Hutchison were signed in 1997 and at that time the canal was completely under US administration in the so-called Canal Zone.  Only after 1 January 2000 Panama regained control over this zone. And Panama had no reason to revoke the contracts with CK Hutchison so far as no one objected until Trump 2.0.
fkPpfE5WQGM [fkPp-27] (0L) China should dismantle all the ports and destroy all the structures they build in Panama.
e-TGcMaokns [e-TG-1] (9L) So they are gonna steal the port like they stole Nexperia?
e-TGcMaokns [e-TG-5] (2L) Panama’s high court decision to annul the contract of a Hong Kong based port operator widely seen as reducing Chinese influence near the Panama Canal. Several countries in Latin America are balancing trade and investments from China with security, diplomatic and infrastructural ties to the U.S. which is currently adjusting and shaping foreign policy calculations for 2026. The main political topic 
e-TGcMaokns [e-TG-11] (0L) Black Rock already purchased 80 percent of the port operations from CK Hutchison in 2025 for 23 billion.
e-TGcMaokns [e-TG-12] (0L) Anyone doing business with anyone who stole the port will be sanctioned by China and that is a bigger deal than USA sanctions.
e-TGcMaokns [e-TG-14] (0L) Kontrak itu terjadi pada tahun 90. Dimana hongkong masih di bawah mandat Inggris Sebelum di ambil cina. Serta pengaruh cina belum kuat. Dan masalah laut cina selatan mengemuka di tahun 95 tentang garis putus.