6LNuRW9t4JA [6LNu-20] (38L) Hello, I'm someone who is from Panama, and although I really enjoyed your video, I'm quite disappointed the fact you left out Manuel Amador Guerrero, who is one of our key revolutionaries and the man who promoted the idea of separating from Colombia, whose wife designed our flag. The video came off as Panamanians simply left all the work to this French guy, when simply that is not true. Manuel act
6LNuRW9t4JA [6LNu-41] (14L) They kinda left out the facts that the French engineer went behind the 🇵🇦 peoples back and sold the project to the Americans and that is why no Panamanian people signed it. They didn’t They weren’t happy about being colonized by the American people after wanting the French and Colombian out of 🇵🇦 . Telling the truth about historical facts even the ugliest parts of it . It was many things done grea
6LNuRW9t4JA [6LNu-92] (4L) So Colombia finance it, the French bankrupt Colombia, then imperialist Roosevelt went behind the Colombian government and incited panamenians to seek its independence so the US could have control over the canal and then paid colombia a misery for both the country and the canal and on November 3 1903 Panama achieved its independance. That's how the US grabbed the canal and made Panama gets its inde
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-11] (529L) Things the channel didn't cover:  1.- There were plans for Gran Colombia to make the Panama Canal as well, but they didn't have the money and they didn't want foreign countries to make it (for the exact reason the US did it) so it wasn't made then.  2.- Colombia didn't do nothing because it was in the middle of a Civil War (the 1000 Days War) and both sides were so desperate to win that they were 
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-32] (72L) I was 10 when Carter signed this treaty and I remember a lot of people being seriously upset about us just "giving" away something that was "ours". But one serious element you did not even mention was that the canal zone was thousands of miles from mainland US and surrounded by another country. Its operation was pretty fragile and if we refused to return the canal and that relationship soured all 
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-48] (37L) Many years ago my  U.S. History professor said that after Colombia refused to play ball "T.R stole the panama canal fair and square"  lol
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-75] (12L) The Panamanian government never said “yes” to giving away the center the country …it was the first minister of foreign affairs, a French engineer and lobbyist called Phillipe Bunau Varilla, who without any legal formal authority drafted and signed a treaty favorable to the US (Hay Bunau Varilla Treaty) before the Panamanian delegation reached Washington to actually negotiate the treaty. There on t
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-108] (7L) A strong country took Panama from Colombia and forced Panamanian to sign a humiliating treaty and allowed to build a Canal in their territory. Giving back the canal to Panama was rightful and the only just thing to do after such an assault to a weaker country.
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-116] (6L) As a Colombian, we still joke to this day about retrieving Panama while everyone's distracted with Ukraine, same with Argentinians about the Falklands lmfao
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-117] (6L) The U.S. did not “decide” to help the separatist rebels, they orchestrated the whole thing and then forced Colombia to accept the independence of Panamá.
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-151] (3L) It is important to understand, Panama was a province of Colombia, US help to get that land ...
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-174] (2L) I would like to add that the "embassador" that signed the first treaty between the "rebels" and the americans was a French national that hold the majority of the stakes at the french company that failed in building the canal and was gonna sold the company to the USA, agreeing to give all that land to the americans without the consent of the other panamenian leaders. From that point on the panameni
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-193] (0L) How on earth did you manage to tell this story without the most important person involved "Phillipe Bunau-Varilla" without him the canal would not exist.
0t2EE5JZP-M [0t2E-200] (0L) You left out the part where no Panamanian signed the agreement, a Frenchman signed for Panama, he had bought up all the French debt From the French attempt and collected a large amount of money in the transaction, then split never returning to Panama. Everything else is good, I love all your videos!
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-11] (98L) As a Panamanian student, who is currently enrolled in college history about Panama and US relationship, this video is awesome but lacks a lot of history and background facts. Although Panama citizens (or Nueva Granada) wanted to separate from Colombia, Colombia had an agreement with the french. U.S negotiated with Colombia first offering them around 10 million dollars for the Nueva Granda (Panamá 
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-15] (66L) Panama: Thanks for supporting our independence from Colombia, USA. We now have self-determination, right?  USA: Yeah... about that
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-22] (27L) I loved this video! I'm Panamanian and everything was well-covered except one thing: The US didn't go to Panamanians directly. The leaders of the Panamanian separatist movement were in New York looking for the government's support with the separation movement. However, instead of striking a deal with them, the U.S. signed a treaty with one of the main investors of the French Canal project, Phillip
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-48] (5L) Nice. Aside from Teddy R. there was also another key figure,  Mr.Philipe Bunau-Varilla. Im not Panamanian but I know that he is a key figure in making the Canal happen.
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-78] (2L) just a few tidbits... Charles V is credited with the first idea of constructing an American Isthmus canal in Panama as early as 1520.  Bunau-Varilla (who signed the original treaty) was long resented by Panamanians for the betrayed trust put in him by the new Panamanian authorities.
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-114] (1L) The french left? What about Philippe Bunau-Varilla? That guy was a mad lad who refused to lost his money after De Lesseps fail and helped the American project. Also the locks idea was from Adolphe Godin de Lépinay, a coworker of De Lesseps.
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-124] (1L) Did you know in Colombia's shield , we still show a Panama as part of us, but we know USA taked advantage of a difficult moment in Colombia and they promoted the independence of Panama JUST FOR TAKE THE TOTAL CONTROL OF THEM.
uE_UuHRtXCY [uE_U-162] (0L) Why there wasn't even a mention to Varilla in this video? I believed that he was the one to convince the Panamanians to srike against Columbia...
Z0m8pYNgROA [Z0m8-51] (0L) There would be no "panama" without americas help. Colombia lost their territory. Panamanians need to understand that their freedom and prosperity today is closely tied to Americas actions a century ago.
AyrfxG1Po-g [Ayrf-98] (0L) Panamá failed to realize that if wasn’t for the United States Panama would be a province of Colombia the U.S. basically created Panama to build that canal many died and billions spend by the U.S. to let a democrat fool to gift the Canal Zone to Panama so they can let the most ruthless people to running it, China only cares about their people their country and their interests.